## <span id="pref02"></span>INTRODUCTION

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#pref02">Introduction</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#pref03">Parliamentary Law</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#pref04">Plan of the Work</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#pref05">Definitions</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### <span id="pref03"></span>Parliamentary Law.

Parliamentary Law refers originally to the customs and rules of
conducting business in the English Parliament; and thence to the customs
and rules of our own legislative assemblies. In England these customs
and usages of Parliament form a part of the unwritten law of the land,
and in our own legislative bodies they are of authority in all cases
where they do not conflict with existing rules or precedents.

But as a people we have not the respect which the English have for
customs and precedents, and are always ready for innovations which we
think are improvements, and hence changes have been and are being
constantly made in the written rules which our legislative bodies have
found best to adopt. As each house adopts its own rules, it results that
the two houses of the same legislature do not always agree in their
practice; even in Congress the order of precedence of motions is not the
same in both houses, and the Previous Question is admitted in the House
of Representatives, but not in the Senate. As a consequence of this, the
exact method of conducting business in any particular legislative body
is to be obtained only from the Legislative Manual of that body.

The vast number of societies, political, literary, scientific,
benevolent and religious, formed all over the land, though not
legislative, are still deliberative in their character, and must have
some system of conducting business, and some rules to govern their
proceedings, and are necessarily subject to the common parliamentary law
where it does not conflict with their own special rules. But as their
knowledge of parliamentary law has been obtained from the usages in this
country, rather than from the customs of Parliament, it has resulted
that these societies have followed the customs of our own legislative
bodies, and our people have thus been educated under a system of
parliamentary law which is peculiar to this country, and yet so well
established as to supersede the English parliamentary law as the common
law of ordinary deliberative assemblies.

The practice of the National House of Representatives should have the
same force in this country as the usages of the House of Commons have in
England, in determining the general principles of the common
parliamentary law of the land; but it does not follow that in every
matter of detail the rules of Congress can be appealed to as the common
law governing every deliberative assembly. In these matters of detail,
the rules of each House of Congress are adapted to their own peculiar
wants, and are of no force whatever in other assemblies.

But upon all great parliamentary questions, such as what motions can be
made, what is their order of precedence, which can be debated, what is
their effect, etc., the common law of the land is settled by the
practice of the U. S. House of Representatives, and not by that of the
English Parliament, the U. S. Senate, or any other body.

While in extreme cases there is no difficulty in deciding the question
as to whether the practice of Congress determines the common
parliamentary law, yet between these extremes there must necessarily be
a large number of doubtful cases upon which there would be great
difference of opinion, and to avoid the serious difficulties always
arising from a lack of definiteness in the law, every deliberative
assembly should imitate our legislative bodies in adopting Rules of
Order for the conduct of their business.\* \[Where the practice of
Congress differs from that of Parliament upon a material point, the
common law of this country follows the practice of Congress. Thus in
every American deliberative assembly having no rules for conducting
business, the motion to adjourn would be decided to be undebatable, as
in Congress, the English parliamentary law to the contrary
notwithstanding; so if the Previous Question were negatived, the debate
upon the subject would continue as in Congress, whereas in Parliament
the subject would be immediately dismissed; so too the Previous Question
could be moved when there was before the assembly a motion either to
amend, to commit, or to postpone definitely or indefinitely, just as in
Congress, notwithstanding that, according to English parliamentary law,
the Previous Question could not be moved under such circumstances. When
the rules of the two Houses of Congress conflict, the H. R. rules are of
greater authority than those of the Senate in determining the
parliamentary law of the country, just as the practice of the House of
Commons, and not the House of Lords, determines the parliamentary law of
England. For instance, though the Senate rules do not allow the motion
for the Previous Question, and make the motion to postpone indefinitely
take precedence of every other subsidiary motion \[§ 7\] except to lie
on the table, yet the parliamentary law of the land follows the practice
of the House of Representatives, in recognizing the Previous Question as
a legitimate motion, and assigning to the very lowest rank the motion to
postpone indefinitely. But in matters of detail, the rules of the House
of Representatives are adapted to the peculiar wants of that body, and
are of no authority in any other assembly. No one for instance would
accept the following H. R. rules as common parliamentary law in this
country: That the chairman, in case of disorderly conduct, would have
the power to order the galleries to be cleared; that the ballot could
not be used in electing the officers of an assembly; that any fifteen
members would be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members
and make them pay the expenses of the messengers sent after them; that
all committees not appointed by the Chair would have to be appointed by
ballot, and if the required number were not elected by a majority vote,
then a second ballot must be taken in which a plurality of votes would
prevail; that each member would be limited in debate upon any question,
to one hour; that a day’s notice must be given of the introduction of a
bill, and that before its passage it must be read three times, and that
without the special order of the assembly it cannot be read twice the
same day. These examples are sufficient to show the absurdity of the
idea that the rules of Congress in all things determine the common
parliamentary law.\]

### <span id="pref04"></span>Plan of the Work.

This Manual is prepared to partially meet this want in deliberative
assemblies that are not legislative in their character. It has been made
sufficiently complete to answer for the rules of an assembly, until they
see fit to adopt special rules conflicting with and superseding any of
its rules of detail, such as the Order of Business \[§ 44\], etc. Even
in matters of detail the practice of Congress is followed, wherever it
is not manifestly unsuited to ordinary assemblies, and in such cases, in
Part I, there will be found, in a foot note, the Congressional practice.
In the important matters referred to above, in which the practice of the
House of Representatives settles the common parliamentary law of the
country, this Manual strictly conforms to such practice.\* \[On account
of the party lines being so strictly drawn in Congress, no such thing as
harmony of action is possible, and it has been found best to give a bare
majority in the House of Representatives (but not in the Senate) the
power to take final action upon a question without allowing of any
discussion. In ordinary societies more regard should be paid to the
rights of the minority, and a two-thirds vote be required, as in this
Manual \[§ 39\], for sustaining an objection to the introduction of a
question, or for adopting a motion for the Previous Question, or for
adopting an order closing or limiting debate. In this respect the policy
of the Pocket Manual is a mean between those of the House and Senate.
But some societies will doubtless find it advantageous to follow the
practice of the H. R., and others will prefer that of the Senate. It
requires a majority, according to the Pocket Manual, to order the yeas
and nays, which is doubtless best in the majority of assemblies; but in
all bodies in which the members are responsible to their constituents, a
much smaller number should have this power. In Congress it requires but
a one-fifth vote, and in some bodies a single member can require a vote
to be taken by yeas and nays. Any society adopting this Manual, should
make its rules govern them in all cases to which they are applicable,
and in which they are not inconsistent with the By-Laws and Rules of
Order of the society. Their own rules should include all of the cases
where it is desirable to vary from the rules in the Manual, and
especially should provide for a Quorum \[§ 43\], and an Order of
Business \[§ 44\], as suggested in these rules.\]

The Manual is divided into two distinct parts, each complete in itself.
\[The table at the end contains a large amount of information in a
tabular form, for easy reference in the midst of the business of a
meeting.\]

Part I contains a set of Rules of Order systematically arranged, as
shown in the Table of Contents. Each one of the forty-five sections is
complete in itself, so that no one unfamiliar with the work can be
misled in examining any particular subject. Cross references are freely
used to save repeating from other sections, and by this means the
reader, without using the index, is referred to everything in the Rules
of Order that has any bearing upon the subject he is investigating. The
references are by sections, and for convenience the numbers of the
sections are placed at the top of each page. The motions are arranged
under the usual classes, in their order of rank, but in the index under
the word motion will be found an alphabetical list of all the motions
generally used. In reference to each motion there is stated:

(1) Of what motions it takes precedence (that is, what motions may, be
pending, and yet it be in order to make this motion).  
  (2) To what motions it yields (that is, what motions may be made while
this motion is pending).  
  (3) Whether it is debatable or not.  
  (4) Whether it can be amended or not.  
  (5) In case the motion can have no subsidiary motion applied to it,
the fact is stated \[see Adjourn, § 11, for an example: the meaning is,
that the particular motion to adjourn, for example, cannot be laid on
the table, postponed, committed or amended\].  
  (6) The effect of the motion if adopted.  
  (7) The form of stating the question when peculiar, and whatever other
information is necessary to enable one to understand the question.

Part II. While the second part covers the entire ground of the first
part, it does so in a much simpler manner, being intended for those who
have no acquaintance with the usages of deliberative assemblies. It also
explains the method of organizing an assembly or society, and conducting
a meeting. The motions are treated on an entirely different plan, being
classified according to the objects for which they are used, and those
of each class compared together so that the reader may obtain the best
motion for the accomplishment of any given object. It omits the
complications of parliamentary law, and has but few references to the
rules of Congress, or those in this Manual. In order to make it complete
in itself, it was necessary to repeat a few pages from the first part.

### <span id="pref05"></span>Definitions.

In addition to the terms defined above (taking precedence of, yielding
to and applying to, see p. 14), there are other terms that are liable to
be misunderstood, to which attention should he called.

Meeting and Session.—In this Manual the term “meeting” is used to denote
an assembling together of the members of a deliberative assembly for any
length of time, during which there is no separation of the members by
adjournment. An adjournment to meet again at some other time, even the
same day, terminates the meeting, but not the session, which latter
includes all the adjourned meetings. The next meeting, in this case,
would be an “adjourned meeting” of the same session.

A “meeting” of an assembly is terminated by a temporary adjournment; a
“session” of an assembly ends with an adjournment without day, and may
consist of many meetings \[see Session, § 42\].

Previous Question—This term is frequently understood to refer to the
question previously under consideration. As used in this country it is
equivalent to a motion to “Stop debate, and proceed to voting on all the
questions before the assembly,” with certain exceptions, where it
affects only one motion (as to postpone, to reconsider and an appeal;
see § 20 for a full explanation).

Shall the Question be Considered (or discussed)? This question, which is
put as soon as a subject is brought before an assembly, if any member
“objects to its consideration” (or “discussion,” or “introduction”), is
not intended to merely cut off debate, but to prevent the question from
coming before the assembly for its action. If decided by a two-thirds
vote in the negative, the question is removed from before the assembly
immediately \[see § 15\].

Whenever the word “assembly,” which is used throughout these rules,
occurs in forms of motions (as in Appeals, § 14), it is better to
replace it by the special term used to designate the particular
assembly; as for instance, “Society,” or “Convention,” or “Board.” The
term “Congress,” when used in this Manual, refers to the House of
Representatives of the U.S.
