### <span id="art10"></span>Art. X. Officers and Committees

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#art10"><strong>Art. X.—Officers and
Committees</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec50">§ 50. President or Chairman</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec51">§ 51. Secretary, or Clerk, and the Minutes</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec52">§ 52. Treasurer</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec53">§ 53. Committees</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec50"></span>50. Chairman or President. It is the duty of the
chairman to call the meeting to order at the appointed time, to preside
at all the meetings, to announce the business before the assembly in its
proper order, to state and put all questions properly brought before the
assembly, to preserve order and decorum, and to decide all questions of
order (subject to an appeal). When he “puts a question” to vote, and
when speaking upon an appeal, he should stand;\* \[In meetings of boards
of managers, committees and other small bodies, the chairman usually
retains his seat, and even members in speaking do not rise.\] in all
other cases he can sit. In all cases where his vote would affect the
result, or where the vote is by ballot, he can vote. When a member rises
to speak, he should say, “Mr. Chairman,” and the chairman should reply,
“Mr. A;” he should not interrupt a speaker as long as he is in order,
but should listen to his speech, which should be addressed to him and
not to the assembly. The chairman should be careful to abstain from the
appearance of partizanship, but he has the right to call another member
to the chair while he addresses the assembly on a question; when
speaking to a question of order he does not leave the chair.

<span id="sec51"></span>51. The Clerk, Secretary or Recording Secretary,
as he is variously called, should keep a record of the proceedings, the
character of which depends upon the kind of meeting. In an occasional or
mass meeting, the record usually amounts to nothing, but he should
always record every resolution or motion that is adopted.

In a convention it is often desirable to keep a full record for
publication, and where it lasts for several days, it is usual, and
generally best, to appoint one or more assistant clerks. Frequently it
is a tax on the judgment of the clerk to decide what to enter on the
record, or the “Minutes,” as it is usually called. Sometimes the points
of each speech should be entered, and at other times only the remark
that the question was discussed by Messrs. A., B. and C. in the
affirmative, and Messrs. D., E. and F. in the negative. Every resolution
that is adopted should be entered, which can be done in this form: “On
motion of Mr. D. it was resolved that, &c.”

Sometimes a convention does its work by having certain topics previously
assigned to certain speakers, who deliver formal addresses or essays,
the subjects of which are afterwards open for discussion in short
speeches, of five minutes, for instance. In such cases the minutes are
very brief, without they are to be published, when they should contain
either the entire addresses or carefully prepared abstracts of them, and
should show the drift of the discussion that followed each one. In
permanent societies, where the minutes are not published, they consist
of a record of what was done and not what was said, and should be kept
in a book.

The Form of the Minutes can be as follows:

“At a regular meeting of the M. L. Society, held in their hall, on
Tuesday evening, March 16, 1875, Mr. A. in the chair and Mr. B. acting
as secretary, the minutes of the previous meeting were read and
approved. The committee on Applications reported the names of Messrs. C.
and D. as applicants for membership; and on motion of Mr. F. they were
admitted as members. The committee on —— reported a series of
resolutions, which were thoroughly discussed and amended, and finally
adopted as follows:

“Resolved, That \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*”

On motion of Mr. L. the society adjourned.  
L- B-, Secretary.

If the proceedings are to be published, the secretary should always
examine the published proceedings of similar meetings, so as to conform
to the custom, excepting where it is manifestly improper.

The Constitution, By-Laws, Rules of Order and Standing Rules should all
be written in one book, leaving every other page blank; and whenever an
amendment is made to any of them, it should be immediately entered on
the page opposite to the article amended, with a reference to the date
and page of the minutes where is recorded the action of the society.

The secretary has the custody of all papers belonging to the society,
not specially under charge of any other officer. Sometimes his duties
are also of a financial kind, when he should make such reports as are
prescribed in the next section.

<span id="sec52"></span>52. Treasurer. The duties of this officer vary
in different societies. In probably the majority of cases he acts as a
banker, merely holding the funds deposited with him, and paying them out
on the order of the society signed by the secretary. His annual report,
which is always required, in this case consists of merely a statement of
the amount on hand at the commencement of the year, the amount received
during the year (stating from what source received), the total amount
paid out by order of the society, and the balance on hand. When this
report is presented it is referred to an “auditing committee,”
consisting of one or two persons, who examine the treasurer’s books and
vouchers, and certify on his report that they “have examined his
accounts and vouchers and find them correct, and the balance on hand
is,” etc., stating the amount on hand. The auditing committee’s report
being accepted is equivalent to a resolution of the society to the same
effect, namely, that the treasurer’s report is correct.

In the case here supposed, the real financial statement is made either
by the board of trustees, or by the secretary or some other officer,
according to the Constitution of the society. The principles involved,
are, that every officer who receives money is to account for it in a
report to the society, and that whatever officer is responsible for the
disbursements, shall report them to the society. If the secretary, as in
many societies, is really responsible for the expenses, the treasurer
merely paying upon his order, then the secretary should make a full
report of these expenses, so classified as to enable the society to
readily see the amounts expended for various purposes.

It should always be remembered that the financial report is made for the
information of members. The details of dates and separate payments for
the same object, are a hinderance to its being understood, and are
useless, as it is the duty of the auditing committee to examine into the
details and see if the report is correct.

Every disbursing officer should be careful to get a receipt whenever he
makes a payment; these receipts should be preserved in regular order, as
they are the vouchers for the payments, which must be examined by the
auditing committee. Disbursing officers cannot be too careful in keeping
their accounts, and they should insist upon having their accounts
audited every time they make a report, as by this means any error is
quickly detected and may be corrected. When the society has accepted the
auditing committee’s report that the financial report is correct, the
disbursing officer is relieved from the responsibility of the past, and
if his vouchers were lost afterwards, it would cause no trouble. The
best form for these financial reports depends upon the kind of society,
and is best determined by examining those made in similar societies.

The following form can be varied to suit most cases: (when the statement
of receipts and expenses is very long, it is often desirable to specify
the amounts received from one or two particular sources, which can be
done immediately after stating the total receipts; the same course can
be taken in regard to the expenditures):

Treasurer’s Report.

The undersigned, Treasurer of the M. L. Society, begs leave to submit
the following annual report:

The balance on hand at the commencement of the year was —— dollars and
—— cents. There was received from all sources during the year, ——
dollars and —— cents; during the same time the expenses amounted to ——
dollars and —— cents, leaving a balance on hand of —— dollars and ——
cents. The annexed statement of receipts and expenditures will show in
detail the sources from which the receipts were obtained, and the
objects to which the expenditures have been applied. All of which is
respectfully submitted.

S— M—, Treasurer M. L. S.

The “Statement of receipts and expenditures” can be made, by simply
giving a list of receipts, followed by a list of expenses, and finishing
up with the balance on hand. The auditing committee’s certificate to the
correctness of the account should be written on the statement. Often the
statement is made out in the form of an account, as follows:

Dr. The M. L. S. in acct. with S. M., Treas. Cr.
———————————————————————————————————- 1874. 1874.

Dec. 31. To rent of hall .. $500 00 Jan. 1. By balance on hand  
         ” Gas ……….. 80 00 from last year’s  
         ” Stationery …. 26 50 account ………. $ 21 13  
         ” Janitor ……. 360 00 Dec. 31. By initiation fees 95 00  
         ” Balance on hand 24 63 ” members’ dues .. 875 00  
                            ———- ———-  
                            $991 13 $991 13

We do hereby certify that we have examined the accounts and vouchers of
the treasurer, and find them correct; and that the balance in his hands
is twenty-four dollars and sixty-three cents. R. V., J. L., Audit Comm.

<span id="sec53"></span>53. Committees. In small assemblies, especially
in those where but little business is done, there is not much need of
committees. But in large assemblies, or in those doing a great deal of
business, committees are of the utmost importance. When a committee is
properly selected, in nine cases out of ten its action decides that of
the assembly. A committee for action should be small and consist only of
those heartily in favor of the proposed action. A committee for
deliberation or investigation, on the contrary, should be larger and
represent all parties in the assembly, so that its opinion will carry
with it as great weight as possible. The usefulness of the committee
will be greatly impaired, if any important faction of the assembly be
unrepresented on the committee. The appointment of a committee is fully
explained in § 46 (c).

The first member named on a committee is their chairman, and it is his
duty to call together the committee, and preside at their meetings. If
he is absent, or from any cause fails or declines to call a meeting, it
is the duty of the committee to assemble on the call of any two of their
members. The committee are a miniature assembly, only being able to act
when a quorum is present. If a paper is referred to them they must not
deface it in any way, but write their amendments on a separate sheet. If
they originate the paper, all amendments must be incorporated in it.
When they originate the paper, usually one member has previously
prepared a draft, which is read entirely through, and then read by
paragraphs, the chairman pausing after each paragraph and asking, “Are
there any amendments proposed to this paragraph?” No vote is taken on
the adoption of the separate paragraphs, but after the whole paper has
been read in this way, it is open to amendment, generally, by striking
out any paragraph or inserting new ones, or by substituting an entirely
new paper for it. When it has been amended to suit the committee, they
should adopt it as their report, and direct the chairman or some other
member to report it to the assembly. It is then written out, usually
commencing in a style similar to this: “The committee to which was
referred \[state the matter referred\], beg leave to submit the
following report;” or, “Your committee appointed to \[specify the
object\], would respectfully report,” etc. It usually closes thus: “All
of which is respectfully submitted,” followed by the signatures of all
the members concurring in the report, or sometimes by only that of the
chairman.

If the minority submit a report, it commences thus: “The undersigned, a
minority of the committee appointed,” etc., continuing as the regular
report of the committee. After the committee’s report has been read, it
is usual to allow the minority to present their report, but it cannot be
acted upon except by a motion to substitute it for the report of the
committee. When the committee’s report is read, they are discharged
without any motion. A motion to refer the paper back to the same
committee (or to re-commit), if adopted, revives the committee.
