### <span id="art03"></span>Art. III. Motions and their Order of Precedence

_For a list of all the ordinary motions, arranged in their order of precedence, see § 64. All the Privileged and Subsidiary ones in this Article are so arranged._

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#art03"><strong>Art. III.—Motions and their Order of
Precedence</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art03a">Privileged Motions</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec10">§ 10. To fix the time to which to adjourn</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec11">§ 11. Adjourn</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec12">§ 12. Questions of privilege</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec13">§ 13. Orders of the day</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#art03b">Incidental Motions</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec14">§ 14. Appeal [Questions of Order]</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec15">§ 15. Objection to the consideration of a
question</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec16">§ 16. Reading papers</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec17">§ 17. Withdrawal of a motion</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec18">§ 18. Suspension of the Rules</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#art03c">Subsidiary Motions</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec19">§ 19. Lie on the table</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec20">§ 20. Previous Question</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec21">§ 21. Postpone to a certain day</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec22">§ 22. Commit [or Re-commit]</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec23">§ 23. Amend</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec24">§ 24. Postpone indefinitely</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art03d">Miscellaneous Motions</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec25">§ 25. Filling blanks, and Nominations</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec26">§ 26. Renewal of a motion</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec27">§ 27. Reconsideration</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### <span id="art03a"></span>Privileged Motions. \[§§ 10-13. See § 9.\]

<span id="sec10"></span>10. To Fix the Time to which the Assembly shall
Adjourn. This motion takes precedence of all others, and is in order
even after the assembly has voted to adjourn, provided the Chairman has
not announced the result of the vote. If made when another question is
before the assembly, it is undebatable \[§ 35\]; it can be amended by
altering the time. If made when no other question is before the asembly,
it stands as any other principal motion, and is debatable.\*\* \[In
ordinary societies it is better to follow the common parliamentary law,
and permit this question to be introduced as a principal question, when
it can be debated and suppressed \[§ 58, 59\] like other questions. In
Congress, it is never debatable, and has entirely superseded the
unprivileged and inferior motion to “adjourn to a particular time.”\]

The Form of this motion is, “When this assembly adjourns, it adjourns to
meet at such a time.”

<span id="sec11"></span>11. To Adjourn. This motion (when unqualified)
takes precedence of all others, except to “fix the time to which to
adjourn,” to which it yields. It is not debatable, and cannot be
amended, or have any other subsidiary motion \[§ 7\] applied to it. If
qualified in any way it loses its privileged character, and stands as
any other principal motion. The motion to adjourn can be repeated if
there has been any intervening business, though it be simply progress in
debate \[§ 26\]. When a committee is through with any business referred
to it, and prepared to report, instead of adjourning, a motion should be
made “to rise,” which motion, in committee, has the same privileges as
to adjourn in the assembly \[§ 32\].

The effect upon Unfinished Business of an adjournment is as follows\*
\[“After six days from the commencement of a second or subsequent
session of any Congress, all bills, resolutions and reports which
originated in the House, and at the close of the next preceding session
remained undetermined, shall be resumed, and acted on in the same manner
as if an adjournment had not taken place.” Rule 136, H. R. Any ordinary
society that meets as seldom as once each year, is apt to be composed of
as different membership at its successive meetings, as any two
successive Congresses, and only trouble would result from allowing
unfinished business to hold over to the next yearly meeting.\] \[see
Session, § 42\]:

\(a\) When it does not close the session, the business interrupted by
the adjournment is the first in order after the reading of the minutes
at the next meeting, and is treated the same as if there had been no
adjournment; an adjourned meeting being legally the continuation of the
meeting of which it is an adjournment.

\(b\) When it closes a session in an assembly which has more than one
regular session each year, then the unfinished business is taken up at
the next succeeding session previous to new business, and treated the
same as if there had been no adjournment \[see § 44, for its place in
the order of business\]. Provided, that, in a body elected for a
definite time (as a board of directors elected for one year), unfinished
business falls to the ground with the expiration of the term for which
the board or any portion of them were elected.

\(c\) When the adjournment closes a session in an assembly which does
not meet more frequently than once a year, or when the assembly is an
elective body, and this session ends the term of a portion of the
members, the adjournment shall put an end to all business unfinished at
the close of the session. The business can be introduced at the next
session, the same as if it had never been before the assembly.

<span id="sec12"></span>12. Questions of Privilege. Questions relating
to the rights and privileges of the assembly, or any of its members,
take precedence of all other questions, except the two preceding, to
which they yield. The Previous Question \[§ 20\] can be applied to
these, as to all other debatable questions.

<span id="sec13"></span>13. Orders of the Day. A call for the Orders of
the Day takes precedence of every other motion, excepting to Reconsider
\[§ 27\], and the three preceding, to which latter three it yields, and
is not debatable, nor can it be amended. It does not require to be
seconded.

When one or more subjects have been assigned to a particular day or
hour, they become the Orders of the Day for that day or hour, and they
cannot be considered before that time, except by a two-thirds vote \[§
39\]. And when that day or hour arrives, if called up, they take
precedence of all but the three preceding questions \[§§ 10, 11, 12\].
Instead of considering them, the assembly may appoint another time for
their consideration. If not taken up on the day specified, the order
falls to the ground.

When the Orders of the Day are taken up, it is necessary to take up the
separate questions in their exact order, the one first assigned to the
day or hour, taking precedence of one afterwards assigned to the same
day or hour. (A motion to take up a particular part of the Orders of the
Day, or a certain question, is not a privileged motion). Any of the
subjects, when taken up, instead of being then considered, can be
assigned to some other time.

The Form of this question, as put by the Chair when the proper time
arrives, or on the call of a member, is, “Shall the Order of the Day be
taken up?” or, “Will the assembly now proceed with the Orders of the
Day?”

The Effect of an affirmative vote on a call for the Orders of the Day,
is to remove the question under consideration from before the assembly,
the same as if it had been interrupted by an adjournment \[§ 11\].

The Effect of a negative vote is to dispense with the orders merely so
far as they interfere with the consideration of the question then before
the assembly.

### <span id="art03b"></span>Incidental Motions. \[§§ 14-18; see § 8\]

<span id="sec14"></span>14. Appeal \[Questions of Order\]. A Question of
Order takes precedence of the question giving rise to it, and must be
decided by the presiding officer without debate. If a member objects to
the decision, he says, “I appeal from the decision of the Chair.” If the
Appeal is seconded, the Chairman immediately states the question as
follows: “Shall the decision of the Chair stand as the judgement of the
assembly?”\* \[The word Assembly can be replaced by Society, Convention,
Board, etc., according to the name of the organization.\] This Appeal
yields to Privileged Questions \[§ 9\]. It cannot be amended; it cannot
be debated when it relates simply to indecorum \[§ 36\], or to
transgressions of the rules of speaking, or to the priority of business,
or if it is made while the previous question \[§ 20\] is pending. When
debatable, no member is allowed to speak but once, and whether debatable
or not, the presiding officer, without leaving the Chair, can state the
reasons upon which he bases his decision. The motions to Lie on the
Table \[§ 19\], or for the Previous Question \[§ 20\], can be applied to
an Appeal, when it is debatable, and when adopted they affect nothing
but the Appeal. The vote on an Appeal may also be reconsidered \[§ 27\].
An Appeal is not in order when another Appeal is pending.

It is the duty of the presiding officer to enforce the rules and orders
of the assembly, without debate or delay. It is also the right of every
member, who notices a breach of a rule to insist upon its enforcement.
In such cases he shall rise from his seat, and say, “Mr. Chairman, I
rise to a point of order.” The speaker should immediately take his seat,
and the Chairman requests the member to state his point of order, which
he does, and resumes his seat. The Chair decides the point, and then, if
no appeal is taken, permits the first member to resume his speech. If
the member’s remarks are decided to be improper, and any one objects to
his continuing his speech, he cannot continue it without a vote of the
assembly to that effect. Instead of the method just described, it is
usual, when it is simply a case of improper language used in debate, for
a member to say, “I call the gentleman to order;” the Chairman decides
whether the speaker is in or out of order, and proceeds as before. The
Chairman can ask the advice of members when he has to decide questions
of order, but the advice must be given sitting, to avoid the appearance
of debate; or the Chair, when unable to decide the question, may at once
submit it to the assembly. The effect of laying an appeal on the table,
is to sustain, at least for the time, the decision of the Chair, and
does not carry to the table the question which gave rise to the question
of order.

<span id="sec15"></span>15. Objection to the Consideration of a
Question. An objection can be made to any principal motion \[§ 6\], but
only when it is first introduced, before it has been debated. It is
similar to a question of order \[§ 14,\] in that it can be made while
another member has the floor, and does not require a second; and as the
Chairman can call a member to order, so can he put this question if he
deems it necessary, upon his own responsibility. It can not be debated
\[§ 35\] or have any subsidiary motion \[§ 7\] applied to it. When a
motion is made and any member “objects to its consideration,” the
Chairman shall immediately put the question, “Will the assembly consider
it?” or, “Shall the question be considered” \[or discussed\]? If decided
in the negative by a two-thirds vote \[§ 39\], the whole matter is
dismissed for that session \[§ 42\]; otherwise the discussion continues
as if this question had never been made.

The Object of this motion is not to cut off debate (for which other
motions are provided, see § 37), but to enable the assembly to avoid
altogether any question which it may deem irrelevant, unprofitable or
contentious.\* \[In Congress, the introduction of such questions could
be temporarily prevented by a majority vote under the 41st Rule of the
House of Representatives, which is as follows: “Where any motion or
proposition is made, the question, ‘Will the House now consider it?’
shall not be put unless it is demanded by some member, or is deemed
necessary by the Speaker.” The English use the “Previous Question,” for
a similar purpose \[see note to § 20\]. The question of consideration is
seldom raised in Congress, but in assemblies with very short sessions,
where but few questions can or should be considered, it seems a
necessity that two-thirds of the assembly should be able to instantly
throw out a question they do not wish to consider. The more common form,
in ordinary societies, of putting this question, is, “Shall the question
be discussed?” The form to which preference is given in the rule
conforms more to the Congressional one, and is less liable to be
misunderstood.\]

<span id="sec16"></span>16. Reading Papers. \[For the order of
precedence, see § 8.\] Where papers are laid before the assembly, every
member has a right to have them once read before he can be compelled to
vote on them, and whenever a member asks for the reading of any such
paper, evidently for information, and not for delay, the Chair should
direct it to be read, if no one objects. But a member has not the right
to have anything read (excepting stated above) without getting
permission from the assembly.

<span id="sec17"></span>17. Withdrawal of a Motion. \[For order of
precedence, see § 8.\] When a question is before the assembly and the
mover wishes to withdraw or modify it, or substitute a different one in
its place, if no one objects, the presiding officer grants the
permission; if any objection is made, it will be necessary to obtain
leave to withdraw, etc., on a motion for that purpose. This motion
cannot be debated or amended. When a motion is withdrawn, the effect is
the same as if it had never been made.\* \[In Congress, a motion may be
withdrawn by the mover, before a decision or amendment \[Rule 40, H.
R.\]. Nothing would be gained in ordinary societies by varying from the
common law as stated above.\]

<span id="sec18"></span>18. Suspension of the Rules. \[For the order of
precedence, see § 8.\] This motion is not debatable, and cannot be
amended, nor can any subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion be applied to it, nor a
vote on it be reconsidered \[§ 27\], nor a motion to suspend the rules
for the same purpose be renewed \[§ 26\] at the same meeting, though it
may be renewed after an adjournment, though the next meeting be held the
same day.\* \[In Congress, it cannot be renewed the same day.\] The
rules of the assembly shall not be suspended except for a definite
purpose, and by a two-thirds vote.

The Form of this motion is, to “suspend the rules which interfere with,”
etc., specifying the object of the suspension.

### <span id="art03c"></span>Subsidiary Motions. \[§§ 19-24; see § 7.\]

<span id="sec19"></span>19. To Lie on the Table. This motion takes
precedence of all other Subsidiary Questions \[§ 7\], and yields to any
Privileged \[§ 9\] or Incidental \[§ 8\] Question. It is not debatable,
and cannot be amended or have any other subsidiary motion \[§ 7\]
applied to it. It removes the subject from consideration till the
assembly vote to take it from the table.

The Form of this motion is, “I move that the question lie on the table,”
or, “that it be laid on the table,” or, “to lay the question on the
table.” When it is desired to take the question up again, a motion is
made, either “to take the question from the table,” or “to now consider
such and such a question;” which motion is undebatable, and cannot have
any subsidiary motion applied to it.

The Object of this motion is to postpone the subject in such a way, that
at any time it can be taken up, either at the same or some future
meeting, which could not be accomplished by a motion to postpone, either
definitely or indefinitely. It is also frequently used to suppress a
question \[§ 59\], which it does, provided a majority vote can never be
obtained to take it from the table during that session \[§ 42\].

The Effect of this motion is in general to place on the table everything
that adheres to the subject; so that if an amendment be ordered to lie
on the table, the subject which it is proposed to amend, goes there with
it. The following cases are exceptional: (a) An appeal \[§ 14\] being
laid on the table, has the effect of sustaining, at least for the time,
the decision of the Chair, and does not carry the original subject to
the table. (b) So when a motion to reconsider \[§ 27\] a question is
laid on the table, the original question is left where it was before the
reconsideration was moved. (c) An amendment to the minutes being laid on
the table does not carry the minutes with it.

Even after the ordering of the Previous Question up to the moment of
taking the last vote under it, it is in order to lay upon the table the
questions still before the assembly.

<span id="sec20"></span>20. The Previous Question\* \[The Previous
Question is a technical name for this motion, conveying a wrong
impression of its import, as it has nothing to do with the subject
previously under consideration. To demand the previous question is
equivalent in effect to moving “That debate now cease, and the assembly
immediately proceed to vote on the questions before it,” (the exceptions
are stated above). The English Previous Question is an entirely
different one from ours, and is used for a different purpose. In the
English Parliament it is moved by the enemies of a measure, who then
vote in the negative, and thus prevent for the day, the consideration of
the main question, (which in this country could be accomplished by
“objecting to the consideration of the question” \[§ 15\], if the
objection were sustained). In our Congress, it is moved by the friends
of a measure, who vote in the affirmative with a view to cutting off
debate and immediately bringing the assembly to a vote on the questions
before it. The rules in the two cases are as different as the objects of
the motions. It requires only a majority vote for its adoption in the
House of Representatives, and is not allowed in the United States
Senate.\] takes precedence of every debatable question \[§ 35\], and
yields to Privileged \[§ 9\] and Incidental \[§ 8\] questions, and to
the motion to Lie on the table \[§ 19\]. It is not debatable, and cannot
be amended or have any other Subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion applied to it. It
shall require a two-thirds vote for its adoption.

When a member calls for the previous question, and the call is seconded,
the presiding officer must immediately put the question: “Shall the main
question be now put?” If adopted, the member who introduced the pending
measure still has the right to close the debate \[§ 34\]; after which
the presiding officer, without allowing further discussion, shall put to
vote the questions before the assembly, in their order of precedence,
till the main question, with all its subsidiary and incidental
questions, is disposed of (see the exceptions below). If it fails, the
discussion continues as if this motion had not been made.

The previous question can be moved on a pending amendment, and if
adopted, debate is closed on the amendment only. After the amendment is
voted on, the main question is again open to debate and amendments. \[In
this case the form of the question would be similar to this : “Shall the
amendment be now put to the question?”\]

The Object of this motion is to bring the assembly to a vote on the
question before it without further debate. In ordinary assemblies it is
rarely expedient to deprive a large minority of the right of debate, and
yet two-thirds of the members should have the right to close the debate
when they think it best.

It applies to questions of privilege \[§ 12\] as well as any other
debatable questions. It is allowable for a member to submit a resolution
and at the same time move the previous question thereon.

To illustrate the Effect of this motion, suppose it is adopted when we
have before the assembly, (a) the main question; (b) an amendment; (c) a
motion to commit; (d) a motion to amend the last motion by giving the
committee instructions. The previous question being carried, the
presiding officer would immediately put the question on the last motion
(d); then on the motion to commit, (c); and if this is adopted, of
course the subject is referred to the committee and disposed of for the
present; but if it fails, the amendment (b) is put, and finally the main
question.

Exceptions: If the Previous Question is carried while a motion to
Postpone is pending, its effect is only to bring the assembly to a vote
on that motion; if it is voted not to postpone, the subject is again
open for debate. So if an Appeal \[§ 14\] or a motion to Reconsider \[§
27\] is pending when the Previous Question is ordered, it applies only
to them and is exhausted by the vote on them.

An affirmative vote on the motion to Commit \[§ 22\] exhausts the
Previous Question, and if the vote is reconsidered, it is divested of
the Previous Question.

\[For other methods of closing debate see § 37 and § 58\].

<span id="sec21"></span>21. To Postpone to a Certain Day. This motion
takes precedence of a motion to Commit, or Amend, or Indefinitely
Postpone, and yields to any Privileged \[§ 9\] or Incidental \[§ 8\]
question, and to the motion to Lie on the Table, or for the Previous
Question. It can be amended by altering the time, and the Previous
Question can be applied to it without affecting any other motions
pending. It allows of very limited debate \[§ 35\], and that must not go
into the merits of the subject matter any further than is necessary to
enable the assembly to judge the propriety of the postponement.

The Effect of this motion is to postpone the entire subject to the time
specified, until which time it cannot be taken up except by a two-thirds
vote \[§ 13\]. When that time arrives it is entitled to be taken up in
preference to every thing except Privileged questions. Where several
questions are postponed to different times and are not reached then,
they shall be considered in the order of the times to which they were
postponed. It is not in order to postpone to a time beyond that session
\[§ 42\] of the assembly, except\* \[In Congress a motion cannot be
postponed to the next session, but it is customary in ordinary
societies.\] to the day of the next session when it comes up with the
unfinished business, and consequently takes precedence of new business
\[§ 44\]. If it is desired to hold an adjourned meeting to consider a
special subject, the time to which the assembly shall adjourn \[§ 10\]
should be first fixed before making the motion to postpone the subject
to that day.

<span id="sec22"></span>22. To Commit \[or Recommit as it is called when
the subject has been previously committed\]. This motion takes
precedence of the motions to Amend or Indefinitely Postpone, and yields
to any Privileged \[§ 9\] or Incidental \[§ 8\] Question, and also to
the motion to Lie on the Table, or for the Previous Question, or to
Postpone to a certain day. It can be amended by altering the committee,
or giving it instructions. It is debatable, and opens to debate \[§ 35\]
the merits of the question it is proposed to commit.

The Form of this motion is “to refer the subject to a committee.” When
different committees are proposed they should he voted in the following
order: (1) Committee the whole \[§ 32\], (2) a standing committee, and
(3) a special (or select) committee. The number of a committee is
usually decided without the formality of a motion, as in filling blanks
\[§ 25\]: the Chairman asks “of how many shall the committee consist?”
and a question is then put upon each number suggested, beginning with
the largest. The number and kind of the committee need not be decided
till after it has been voted to refer the subject to a committee. If the
committee is a select one, and the motion does not include the method of
appointing it, and there is no standing rule on the subject, the
Chairman inquires how the committee shall be appointed, and this is
usually decided informally. Sometimes the Chair “appoints,” in which
case he names the members of the committee and no vote is taken upon
them; or the committee is “nominated” either by the Chair or members of
the assembly (no member nominating more than one except by general
consent), and then they are all voted upon together, except where more
nominations are made than the number of the committee, when they shall
be voted upon singly.

Where a committee is one for action (a committee of arrangements for
holding a public meeting, for example), it should generally be small,
and no one placed upon it who is not favorable to the proposed action;
and if any such should be appointed he should ask to be excused. But
when the committee is for deliberation or investigation, it is of the
utmost importance that all parties be represented on it, so that in
committee the fullest discussion may take place, and thus diminish the
chances of unpleasant debates in the assembly.

In ordinary assemblies, by judicious appointment of committees, debates
upon delicate and troublesome questions can be mostly confined to the
committees, which will contain the representative members of all
parties. \[See Reports of Committees, § 29.\]

<span id="sec23"></span>23. To Amend. This motion takes precedence of
nothing but the question which it proposed to amend, and yields to any
Privileged \[§ 9\], Incidental \[§ 8\] or Subsidiary \[§ 7\] Question,
except to Indefinitely Postpone. It can be amended itself, but this
“amendment of an amendment” cannot be amended. An Amendment may be
inconsistent with one already adopted, or may directly conflict with the
spirit of the original motion, but it must have a direct bearing upon
the subject of that motion. To illustrate: a motion for a vote of thanks
could be amended by substituting for “thanks” the word “censure;” or one
condemning certain customs could be amended by adding other customs.

An Amendment may be in any of the following forms: (a) to “add or
insert” certain words or paragraphs; (b) to “strike out” certain words
or paragraphs, the question, however, being stated by the Chair thus:
“Shall these words (or paragraphs) stand as a part of the resolution?”
and if this is adopted (that is, the motion to “strike out,” fails) it
does not preclude either amendment or a motion to “strike out and
insert;” (c) “to strike certain words and insert others,” which motion
is indivisible, and if lost does not preclude another motion to strike
out the same words and insert different ones; (d) to “substitute”
another motion on the same subject for the one pending; (e) to “divide
the question” into two or more questions, as the mover specifies, so as
to get a separate vote on any particular point or points \[see § 4\].

If a paragraph is inserted it should be perfected by its friends
previous to voting on it, as when once inserted it cannot be struck out
or amended except by adding to it. The same is true in regard to words
to be inserted in a resolution, as when once inserted they cannot be
struck out, except by a motion to strike out the paragraph, or such a
portion of it as shall make the question an entirely different one from
that of inserting the particular words. The principle involved is that
when the assembly has voted that certain words shall form a part of a
resolution, it is not in order to make another motion which involves
exactly the same question as the one they have decided. The only way to
bring it up again is to move a Reconsideration \[§ 27\] of the vote by
which the words were inserted.

In stating the question on an Amendment the Chairman should read (1) the
passage to be amended; (2) the words to be struck out, if any; (3) the
words to be inserted, if any; and (4) the whole passage as it will stand
if the amendment is adopted. \[For amending reports of committees, and
propositions containing several paragraphs, see § 44.\]

The numbers prefixed to paragraphs are only marginal indications, and
should be corrected, if necessary, by the clerk, without any motion to
amend.

The following motions cannot be amended:

To Adjourn (when unqualified) ………………………. See § 11.  
  For the Orders of the Day ………………………….. ” § 12.  
  All Incidental Questions …………………………… ” § 8.  
  To Lie on the Table ……………………………….. ” § 19.  
  For the Previous Question ………………………….. ” § 20.  
  An Amendment of an Amendment ……………………….. ” § 23.  
  To Postpone Indefinitely …………………………… ” § 24.  
  Reconsider ……………………………………….. ” § 27.

An Amendment to Rules of Order, By-Laws or a Constitution shall require
previous notice and a two-thirds vote for its adoption \[see § 45\].

<span id="sec24"></span>24. To Postpone Indefinitely. This motion takes
precedence of nothing except the Principal Question \[§ 6\], and yields
to any Privileged \[§ 9\], Incidental \[§ 8\] or Subsidiary \[§ 7\]
Motion, except to Amend. It cannot be amended; it opens to debate the
entire question which it is proposed to postpone. Its effect is to
entirely remove the question from before the assembly for that session
\[§ 42\].

The Previous Question \[§ 20\], if ordered when this motion is pending,
applies only to it without affecting the main question.

### <span id="art03d"></span>Miscellaneous Motions. \[§§ 25-27.\]

<span id="sec25"></span>25. Filling Blanks. In filling blanks the
largest sum and the longest time proposed shall be first put to the
question. Sometimes the most convenient way of amending a resolution is
to create a blank by moving to strike out a certain number or time. It
is customary for any number of members to propose numbers to fill a
blank without the formality of a motion, these different propositions
not being regarded in the light of amendments.

Nominations are treated in a similar manner, so that the second
nomination, instead of being an amendment to the first, is an
independent motion, which, if the first fails, is to be immediately
voted upon. Any number of nominations can be made, the Chairman
announcing each name as he hears it, and they should be voted upon in
the order announced, until one receives a vote sufficient for an
election.

<span id="sec26"></span>26. Renewal of a Motion. When any Principal
Question \[§ 6\] or Amendment has been once acted upon by the assembly,
it cannot be taken up again at the same session \[§ 42\] except by a
motion to Reconsider \[§ 27\]. The motion to Adjourn can be renewed if
there has been progress in debate, or any business transacted. As a
general rule the introduction of any motion that alters the state of
affairs makes it admissible to renew any Privileged or Incidental motion
(excepting Suspension of the Rules as provided in § 18), or Subsidiary
motion (excepting an amendment), as in such a case the real question
before the assembly is a different one.

To illustrate: a motion that a question lie on the table having failed,
suppose afterwards it be moved to refer the matter to a committee, it is
now in order to move again that the subject lie on the table; but such a
motion would not be in order, if it were not made till after the failure
of the motion to commit, as the question then resumes its previous
condition.

When a subject has been referred to a committee which reports at the
same meeting, the matter stands before the assembly as if it had been
introduced for the first time. A motion which has been withdrawn has not
been acted upon, and therefore can be renewed.

<span id="sec27"></span>27. Reconsider. It is in order at any time, even
when another member has the floor, or while the assembly is voting on
the motion to Adjourn, during the day\* \[In Congress any one can move a
reconsideration, excepting where the vote is taken by yeas and nays \[§
38\], when the rule above applies. The motion can be made on the same or
succeeding day.\] on which a motion has been acted upon, to move to
“Reconsider the vote” and have such motion “entered on the record,” but
it cannot be considered while another question is before the assembly.
It must be made, excepting when the vote is by ballot, by a member who
voted with the prevailing side; for instance, in case a motion fails to
pass for lack of a two-thirds vote, a reconsideration must be moved by
one who voted against the motion.

A motion to reconsider the vote on a Subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion takes
precedence of the main question. It yields to Privileged \[§ 9\]
questions (except for the Orders of the Day), and Incidental \[§ 8\]
questions.

This motion can be applied\* \[It is not the practice to reconsider an
affirmative vote on the motion to lie on the table, as the same result
can be more easily reached by the motion to take from the table. For a
similar reason, an affirmative vote on the motion to take from the table
cannot be reconsidered.\] to every question, except to Adjourn and to
Suspend the Rules. It is debatable or not, just as the question to be
reconsidered is debatable or undebatable \[§ 35\]; when debatable, it
opens up for discussion the entire subject to be reconsidered, and can
have the Previous question \[§ 20\] applied to it without affecting any
thing but the motion to reconsider. It can be laid on the table \[§
19\], and in such cases the last motion cannot be reconsidered; it is
quite common and allowable to combine these two motions (though they
must be voted on separately); in this case, the reconsideration like any
other question, can be taken from the table, but possesses no
privilege.\*\* \[In Congress this is a common method used by the friends
of a measure to prevent its reconsideration.\] The motion to reconsider
being laid on the table does not carry with it the pending measure. If
an amendment to a motion has been either adopted or rejected, and then a
vote taken on the motion as amended, it is not in order to reconsider
the vote on the amendment until after the vote on the original motion
has been reconsidered. If anything which the assembly cannot reverse,
has been done as the result a vote, then that vote cannot be
reconsidered.

The Effect of making this motion is to suspend all action that the
original motion would have required until the reconsideration is acted
upon; but if it is not called up, its effect terminates with the session
\[§ 42\], provided,\* \[In Congress the effect always terminates with
the session, and it cannot be called up by any one but the mover, until
the expiration of the time during which it is in order to move a
reconsideration.\] that in an assembly having regular meetings as often
as monthly, if no adjourned meeting upon another day is held of the one
at which the reconsideration was moved, its effect shall not terminate
till the close of the next succeeding session. \[See note at end of this
section.\] While this motion is so highly privileged as far as relates
to having it entered on the minutes, yet the reconsideration of another
question cannot be made to interfere with the discussion of a question
before the assembly, but as soon as that subject is disposed of, the
reconsideration, if called up, takes precedence of every thing except
the motions to adjourn, and to fix the time to which to adjourn. As long
as its effect lasts (as shown above), any one can call up the motion to
reconsider and have it acted upon—excepting that when its effect extends
beyond the meeting at which the motion was made, no one but the mover
can call it up at that meeting. But the reconsideration of an Incidental
\[§ 8\] or Subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion shall be immediately acted upon, as
otherwise it would prevent action on the main question.

The Effect of the adoption of this motion is to place before the
assembly the original question in the exact position it occupied before
it was voted upon; consequently no one can debate the question
reconsidered who had previously exhausted his right of debate \[§ 34\]
on that question; his only resource is to discuss the question while the
motion to reconsider is before the assembly.

When a vote taken under the operation of the previous question \[§ 20\]
is reconsidered, the question is then divested of the previous question,
and is open to debate and amendment, provided the previous question had
been exhausted \[see latter part of § 20\] by votes taken on all the
questions covered by it, before the motion to reconsider was made.

A reconsideration requires only a majority vote, regardless of the vote
necessary to adopt the motion reconsidered. \[For reconsidering in
committee see § 28\].

Note On Reconsider.—In the English Parliament a vote once taken cannot
be reconsidered, but in our Congress it is allowed to move a
reconsideration of the vote on the same or succeeding day, and after the
close of the last day for making the motion, any one can call up the
motion to reconsider, so that this motion cannot delay action more than
two days, and the effect of the motion, if not acted upon, terminates
with the session. There seems to be no reason or good precedent for
permitting merely two persons, by moving a reconsideration, to suspend
for any length of time all action under resolutions adopted by the
assembly, and yet where the delay is very short the advantages of
reconsideration overbalance the evils.

Where a permanent society has meetings weekly or monthly, and usually
only a small proportion of the society is present, it seems best to
allow a reconsideration to hold over to another meeting, so that the
society may have notice of what action is about to be taken. To prevent
the motion being used to defeat a measure that cannot be deferred till
the next regular meeting, it is provided that in case the society
adjourn, to meet the next day for instance, then the reconsideration
will not hold over beyond that session; this allows sufficient delay to
notify the society, while, if the question is one requiring immediate
action, the delay cannot extend beyond the day to which they adjourn.
Where the meetings are only quarterly or annual, the society should be
properly represented at each meeting, and their best interests are
subserved by following the practice of Congress, and letting the effect
of the reconsideration terminate with the session.
