### <span id="art01"></span>Art. I. Introduction of Business

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art01"><strong>Art. I.—Introduction of
Business</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec01">§ 1. How introduced</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec02">§ 2. Obtaining the floor</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec03">§ 3. What precedes debate on a question</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec04">§ 4. What motions to be in writing, and how they
shall be divided</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec05">§ 5. Modification of a motion by the
mover</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec01"></span>1. All business should be brought before the
assembly by a motion of a member, or by the presentation of a
communication to the assembly. It is not usual, however, to make a
motion to receive the reports of committees \[[§ 30](/part_1_article_4.html#sec30)\] or communications
to the assembly; and in many other cases in the ordinary routine of
business, the formality of a motion is dispensed with; but should any
member object, a regular motion becomes necessary.

<span id="sec02"></span>2. Before a member can make a motion or address
the assembly upon any question, it is necessary that he obtain the
floor; that is, he must rise and address the presiding officer by his
title, thus: “Mr. Chairman” \[§ 34\], who will then announce the
member’s name. Where two or more rise at the same time the Chairman must
decide who is entitled to the floor, which he does by announcing that
member’s name. From this decision, however, an appeal \[§ 14\] can he
taken; though if there is any doubt as to who is entitled to the floor,
the Chairman can at the first allow the assembly to decide the question
by a vote—the one getting the largest vote being entitled to the floor.

The member upon whose motion the subject under discussion was brought
before the assembly (or, in case of a committee’s report, the one who
presented the report) is entitled to be recognized as having the floor
(if he has not already had it during that discussion), notwithstanding
another member may have first risen and addressed the Chair. If the
Chairman rise to speak before the floor has been assigned to any one, it
is the duty of a member who may have previously risen to take his seat.
\[See Decorum in Debate, § 36.\]

When a member has obtained the floor, he cannot be cut off from
addressing the assembly, nor be interrupted in this speech by a motion
to adjourn, or for any purpose, by either the Chairman or any member,
except (a) to have entered on the minutes a motion to reconsider \[§
27\]; (b) by a call to order \[§ 14\]; (c) by an objection to the
consideration of the question \[§ 15\]; or (d) by a call for the orders
of the day \[§ 13\].\* \[See note to § 61.\] In such cases the member
when he arises and addresses the Chair should state at once for what
purpose he rises, as, for instance, that he “rises to a point of order.”
A call for an adjournment, or for the question, by members in their
seats, is not a motion; as no motion can be made, without rising and
addressing, the Chair, and being announced by the presiding officer.
Such calls for the question are themselves breaches of order, and do not
prevent the speaker from going on if he pleases.

<span id="sec03"></span>3. Before any subject is open to debate \[§ 34\]
it is necessary, first, that a motion he made; second, that it be
seconded, (see exceptions below); and third, that it be stated by the
presiding officer. When the motion is in writing it shall be handed to
the Chairman, and read before it is debated.

This does not prevent suggestions of alterations, before the question is
stated by the presiding officer. To the contrary, much time may be saved
by such informal remarks; which, however, must never be allowed to run
into debate. The member who offers the motion, until it has been stated
by the presiding officer, can modify his motion, or even withdraw it
entirely; after it is stated he can do neither, without the consent of
the assembly. \[See §§ 5 and 17\]. When the mover modifies his motion,
the one who seconded it can withdraw his second.

Exceptions: A call for the order of the day, a question of order (though
not an appeal), or an objection to the consideration of a question \[§§
13, 14, 15\], does not have to be seconded; and many questions of
routine are not seconded or even made; the presiding officer merely
announcing that, if no objection is made, such will be considered the
action of the assembly.

<span id="sec04"></span>4. All Principal Motions \[§ 6\], Amendments and
Instructions to Committees, should be in writing, if required by the
presiding officer. Although a question is complicated, and capable of
being made into several questions, no one member (without there is a
special rule allowing it) can insist upon its being divided; his
resource is to move that the question be divided, specifying in his
motion how it is to be divided. Any one else can move as an amendment to
this, to divide it differently.

This Division of a Question is really an amendment \[§ 23\], and subject
to the same rules. Instead of moving a division of the question, the
same result can be usually attained by moving some other form of an
amendment. When the question is divided, each separate question must be
a proper one for the assembly to act upon, even if none of the others
were adopted. Thus, a motion to “commit with instructions,” is
indivisible, because if divided, and the motion to commit should fail,
then the other motion to instruct the committee would be improper, as
there would be no committee to instruct.\* \[The 46th Rule of the House
of Representatives requires the division of a question on the demand of
one member, provided “it comprehends propositions in substance so
distinct that one being taken away, a substantive proposition shall
remain for the decision of the House.” But this does not allow a
division so as to have a vote on separate items or names. The 121st Rule
expressly provides that on the demand of one-fifth of the members a
separate vote shall be taken on such items separately, and others
collectively, as shall be specified in the call, in the case of a bill
making appropriations for internal improvements. But this right to
divide a question into items extends to no case but the one specified.
The common parliamentary law allows of no division except when the
assembly orders it, and in ordinary assemblies this rule will be found
to give less trouble than the Congressional one.\]

The motion to “strike out certain words and insert others,” is
indivisible, as it is strictly one proposition.

<span id="sec05"></span>5. After a question has been stated by the
presiding officer, it is in the possession of the assembly for debate;
the mover cannot withdraw or modify it, if any one objects, except by
obtaining leave from the assembly \[§ 17\], or by moving an amendment.

### <span id="art02"></span>Art. II. General Classification of Motions. \[§§ 6-9.\]

<span id="sec06"></span>6. A Principal or Main Question or Motion, is a
motion made to bring before the assembly, for its consideration, any
particular subject. No Principal Motion can be made when any other
question is before the assembly. It takes precedence of nothing, and
yields to all Privileged, Incidental and Subsidiary Questions \[§§ 7, 8,
9\].

<span id="sec07"></span>7. Subsidiary or Secondary Questions or Motions
relate to a Principal Motion, and enable the assembly to dispose of it
in the most appropriate manner. These motions take precedence of the
Principal Question, and must be decided before the Principal Question
can be acted upon. They yield to Privileged and Incidental Questions
\[§§ 8, 9\], and are as follows (being arranged in their order of
precedence among themselves):

Lie on the Table ……………….. See § 19.  
The Previous Question …………… ” § 20.  
Postpone to a Certain Day ……….. ” § 21.  
Commit ………………………… ” § 22.  
Amend …………………………. ” § 23.  
Postpone Indefinitely …………… ” § 24.

Any of these motions (except Amend) can be made when one of a lower
order is pending, but none can supersede one of a higher order. They
cannot be applied\* \[See Plan of Work and Definitions, in Introduction,
for explanation of some of these technical terms.\] to one another
except in the following cases: (a) the Previous Question applies to the
motion to Postpone, without affecting the principal motion, and can, if
specified, be applied to a pending amendment \[§ 20\]; (b) the motions
to Postpone to a certain day, and to Commit, can be amended; and (c) a
motion to Amend the minutes can be laid on the table without carrying
the minutes with it \[§ 19\].

<span id="sec08"></span>8. Incidental Questions are such as arise out of
other questions, and, consequently, take precedence of, and are to be
decided before, the questions which give rise to them. They yield to
Privileged Questions \[§ 9\], and cannot be amended. Excepting an
Appeal, they are undebatable; an Appeal is debatable or not, according
to circumstances, as shown in § 14. They are as follows:

Appeal (or Questions of Order) ……………………… See § 14.  
  Objection to the Consideration of a Question …………. ” § 15.  
  The Reading of Papers ……………………………… ” § 16.  
  Leave to Withdraw a Motion …………………………. ” § 17.  
  Suspension of the Rules ……………………………. ” § 18.

<span id="sec09"></span>9. Privileged Questions are such as, on account
of their importance, take precedence over all other questions whatever,
and on account of this very privilege they are undebatable \[§ 35\],
excepting when relating to the rights of the assembly or its members, as
otherwise they could be made use of so as to seriously interrupt
business. They are as follows (being arranged in their order of
precedence among themselves):

To Fix the Time to which the Assembly shall Adjourn …… See § 10.  
  Adjourn ………………………………………….. ” § 11.  
  Questions relating to the Rights and  
    Privileges of the Assembly or any of  
    its Members …………………………………….. ” § 12.  
  Call for the Orders of the Day ……………………… ” § 13.

### <span id="art03"></span>Art. III. Motions and their Order of Precedence.\* \[For a list of all the ordinary motions, arranged in their order of precedence, see § 64. All the Privileged and Subsidiary ones in this Article are so arranged.\] \[§§ 10-27.\]

### <span id="art03a"></span>Privileged Motions. \[§§ 10-13. See § 9.\]

<span id="sec10"></span>10. To Fix the Time to which the Assembly shall
Adjourn. This motion takes precedence of all others, and is in order
even after the assembly has voted to adjourn, provided the Chairman has
not announced the result of the vote. If made when another question is
before the assembly, it is undebatable \[§ 35\]; it can be amended by
altering the time. If made when no other question is before the asembly,
it stands as any other principal motion, and is debatable.\*\* \[In
ordinary societies it is better to follow the common parliamentary law,
and permit this question to be introduced as a principal question, when
it can be debated and suppressed \[§ 58, 59\] like other questions. In
Congress, it is never debatable, and has entirely superseded the
unprivileged and inferior motion to “adjourn to a particular time.”\]

The Form of this motion is, “When this assembly adjourns, it adjourns to
meet at such a time.”

<span id="sec11"></span>11. To Adjourn. This motion (when unqualified)
takes precedence of all others, except to “fix the time to which to
adjourn,” to which it yields. It is not debatable, and cannot be
amended, or have any other subsidiary motion \[§ 7\] applied to it. If
qualified in any way it loses its privileged character, and stands as
any other principal motion. The motion to adjourn can be repeated if
there has been any intervening business, though it be simply progress in
debate \[§ 26\]. When a committee is through with any business referred
to it, and prepared to report, instead of adjourning, a motion should be
made “to rise,” which motion, in committee, has the same privileges as
to adjourn in the assembly \[§ 32\].

The effect upon Unfinished Business of an adjournment is as follows\*
\[“After six days from the commencement of a second or subsequent
session of any Congress, all bills, resolutions and reports which
originated in the House, and at the close of the next preceding session
remained undetermined, shall be resumed, and acted on in the same manner
as if an adjournment had not taken place.” Rule 136, H. R. Any ordinary
society that meets as seldom as once each year, is apt to be composed of
as different membership at its successive meetings, as any two
successive Congresses, and only trouble would result from allowing
unfinished business to hold over to the next yearly meeting.\] \[see
Session, § 42\]:

\(a\) When it does not close the session, the business interrupted by
the adjournment is the first in order after the reading of the minutes
at the next meeting, and is treated the same as if there had been no
adjournment; an adjourned meeting being legally the continuation of the
meeting of which it is an adjournment.

\(b\) When it closes a session in an assembly which has more than one
regular session each year, then the unfinished business is taken up at
the next succeeding session previous to new business, and treated the
same as if there had been no adjournment \[see § 44, for its place in
the order of business\]. Provided, that, in a body elected for a
definite time (as a board of directors elected for one year), unfinished
business falls to the ground with the expiration of the term for which
the board or any portion of them were elected.

\(c\) When the adjournment closes a session in an assembly which does
not meet more frequently than once a year, or when the assembly is an
elective body, and this session ends the term of a portion of the
members, the adjournment shall put an end to all business unfinished at
the close of the session. The business can be introduced at the next
session, the same as if it had never been before the assembly.

<span id="sec12"></span>12. Questions of Privilege. Questions relating
to the rights and privileges of the assembly, or any of its members,
take precedence of all other questions, except the two preceding, to
which they yield. The Previous Question \[§ 20\] can be applied to
these, as to all other debatable questions.

<span id="sec13"></span>13. Orders of the Day. A call for the Orders of
the Day takes precedence of every other motion, excepting to Reconsider
\[§ 27\], and the three preceding, to which latter three it yields, and
is not debatable, nor can it be amended. It does not require to be
seconded.

When one or more subjects have been assigned to a particular day or
hour, they become the Orders of the Day for that day or hour, and they
cannot be considered before that time, except by a two-thirds vote \[§
39\]. And when that day or hour arrives, if called up, they take
precedence of all but the three preceding questions \[§§ 10, 11, 12\].
Instead of considering them, the assembly may appoint another time for
their consideration. If not taken up on the day specified, the order
falls to the ground.

When the Orders of the Day are taken up, it is necessary to take up the
separate questions in their exact order, the one first assigned to the
day or hour, taking precedence of one afterwards assigned to the same
day or hour. (A motion to take up a particular part of the Orders of the
Day, or a certain question, is not a privileged motion). Any of the
subjects, when taken up, instead of being then considered, can be
assigned to some other time.

The Form of this question, as put by the Chair when the proper time
arrives, or on the call of a member, is, “Shall the Order of the Day be
taken up?” or, “Will the assembly now proceed with the Orders of the
Day?”

The Effect of an affirmative vote on a call for the Orders of the Day,
is to remove the question under consideration from before the assembly,
the same as if it had been interrupted by an adjournment \[§ 11\].

The Effect of a negative vote is to dispense with the orders merely so
far as they interfere with the consideration of the question then before
the assembly.

### <span id="art03b"></span>Incidental Motions. \[§§ 14-18; see § 8\]

<span id="sec14"></span>14. Appeal \[Questions of Order\]. A Question of
Order takes precedence of the question giving rise to it, and must be
decided by the presiding officer without debate. If a member objects to
the decision, he says, “I appeal from the decision of the Chair.” If the
Appeal is seconded, the Chairman immediately states the question as
follows: “Shall the decision of the Chair stand as the judgement of the
assembly?”\* \[The word Assembly can be replaced by Society, Convention,
Board, etc., according to the name of the organization.\] This Appeal
yields to Privileged Questions \[§ 9\]. It cannot be amended; it cannot
be debated when it relates simply to indecorum \[§ 36\], or to
transgressions of the rules of speaking, or to the priority of business,
or if it is made while the previous question \[§ 20\] is pending. When
debatable, no member is allowed to speak but once, and whether debatable
or not, the presiding officer, without leaving the Chair, can state the
reasons upon which he bases his decision. The motions to Lie on the
Table \[§ 19\], or for the Previous Question \[§ 20\], can be applied to
an Appeal, when it is debatable, and when adopted they affect nothing
but the Appeal. The vote on an Appeal may also be reconsidered \[§ 27\].
An Appeal is not in order when another Appeal is pending.

It is the duty of the presiding officer to enforce the rules and orders
of the assembly, without debate or delay. It is also the right of every
member, who notices a breach of a rule to insist upon its enforcement.
In such cases he shall rise from his seat, and say, “Mr. Chairman, I
rise to a point of order.” The speaker should immediately take his seat,
and the Chairman requests the member to state his point of order, which
he does, and resumes his seat. The Chair decides the point, and then, if
no appeal is taken, permits the first member to resume his speech. If
the member’s remarks are decided to be improper, and any one objects to
his continuing his speech, he cannot continue it without a vote of the
assembly to that effect. Instead of the method just described, it is
usual, when it is simply a case of improper language used in debate, for
a member to say, “I call the gentleman to order;” the Chairman decides
whether the speaker is in or out of order, and proceeds as before. The
Chairman can ask the advice of members when he has to decide questions
of order, but the advice must be given sitting, to avoid the appearance
of debate; or the Chair, when unable to decide the question, may at once
submit it to the assembly. The effect of laying an appeal on the table,
is to sustain, at least for the time, the decision of the Chair, and
does not carry to the table the question which gave rise to the question
of order.

<span id="sec15"></span>15. Objection to the Consideration of a
Question. An objection can be made to any principal motion \[§ 6\], but
only when it is first introduced, before it has been debated. It is
similar to a question of order \[§ 14,\] in that it can be made while
another member has the floor, and does not require a second; and as the
Chairman can call a member to order, so can he put this question if he
deems it necessary, upon his own responsibility. It can not be debated
\[§ 35\] or have any subsidiary motion \[§ 7\] applied to it. When a
motion is made and any member “objects to its consideration,” the
Chairman shall immediately put the question, “Will the assembly consider
it?” or, “Shall the question be considered” \[or discussed\]? If decided
in the negative by a two-thirds vote \[§ 39\], the whole matter is
dismissed for that session \[§ 42\]; otherwise the discussion continues
as if this question had never been made.

The Object of this motion is not to cut off debate (for which other
motions are provided, see § 37), but to enable the assembly to avoid
altogether any question which it may deem irrelevant, unprofitable or
contentious.\* \[In Congress, the introduction of such questions could
be temporarily prevented by a majority vote under the 41st Rule of the
House of Representatives, which is as follows: “Where any motion or
proposition is made, the question, ‘Will the House now consider it?’
shall not be put unless it is demanded by some member, or is deemed
necessary by the Speaker.” The English use the “Previous Question,” for
a similar purpose \[see note to § 20\]. The question of consideration is
seldom raised in Congress, but in assemblies with very short sessions,
where but few questions can or should be considered, it seems a
necessity that two-thirds of the assembly should be able to instantly
throw out a question they do not wish to consider. The more common form,
in ordinary societies, of putting this question, is, “Shall the question
be discussed?” The form to which preference is given in the rule
conforms more to the Congressional one, and is less liable to be
misunderstood.\]

<span id="sec16"></span>16. Reading Papers. \[For the order of
precedence, see § 8.\] Where papers are laid before the assembly, every
member has a right to have them once read before he can be compelled to
vote on them, and whenever a member asks for the reading of any such
paper, evidently for information, and not for delay, the Chair should
direct it to be read, if no one objects. But a member has not the right
to have anything read (excepting stated above) without getting
permission from the assembly.

<span id="sec17"></span>17. Withdrawal of a Motion. \[For order of
precedence, see § 8.\] When a question is before the assembly and the
mover wishes to withdraw or modify it, or substitute a different one in
its place, if no one objects, the presiding officer grants the
permission; if any objection is made, it will be necessary to obtain
leave to withdraw, etc., on a motion for that purpose. This motion
cannot be debated or amended. When a motion is withdrawn, the effect is
the same as if it had never been made.\* \[In Congress, a motion may be
withdrawn by the mover, before a decision or amendment \[Rule 40, H.
R.\]. Nothing would be gained in ordinary societies by varying from the
common law as stated above.\]

<span id="sec18"></span>18. Suspension of the Rules. \[For the order of
precedence, see § 8.\] This motion is not debatable, and cannot be
amended, nor can any subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion be applied to it, nor a
vote on it be reconsidered \[§ 27\], nor a motion to suspend the rules
for the same purpose be renewed \[§ 26\] at the same meeting, though it
may be renewed after an adjournment, though the next meeting be held the
same day.\* \[In Congress, it cannot be renewed the same day.\] The
rules of the assembly shall not be suspended except for a definite
purpose, and by a two-thirds vote.

The Form of this motion is, to “suspend the rules which interfere with,”
etc., specifying the object of the suspension.

### <span id="art03c"></span>Subsidiary Motions. \[§§ 19-24; see § 7.\]

<span id="sec19"></span>19. To Lie on the Table. This motion takes
precedence of all other Subsidiary Questions \[§ 7\], and yields to any
Privileged \[§ 9\] or Incidental \[§ 8\] Question. It is not debatable,
and cannot be amended or have any other subsidiary motion \[§ 7\]
applied to it. It removes the subject from consideration till the
assembly vote to take it from the table.

The Form of this motion is, “I move that the question lie on the table,”
or, “that it be laid on the table,” or, “to lay the question on the
table.” When it is desired to take the question up again, a motion is
made, either “to take the question from the table,” or “to now consider
such and such a question;” which motion is undebatable, and cannot have
any subsidiary motion applied to it.

The Object of this motion is to postpone the subject in such a way, that
at any time it can be taken up, either at the same or some future
meeting, which could not be accomplished by a motion to postpone, either
definitely or indefinitely. It is also frequently used to suppress a
question \[§ 59\], which it does, provided a majority vote can never be
obtained to take it from the table during that session \[§ 42\].

The Effect of this motion is in general to place on the table everything
that adheres to the subject; so that if an amendment be ordered to lie
on the table, the subject which it is proposed to amend, goes there with
it. The following cases are exceptional: (a) An appeal \[§ 14\] being
laid on the table, has the effect of sustaining, at least for the time,
the decision of the Chair, and does not carry the original subject to
the table. (b) So when a motion to reconsider \[§ 27\] a question is
laid on the table, the original question is left where it was before the
reconsideration was moved. (c) An amendment to the minutes being laid on
the table does not carry the minutes with it.

Even after the ordering of the Previous Question up to the moment of
taking the last vote under it, it is in order to lay upon the table the
questions still before the assembly.

<span id="sec20"></span>20. The Previous Question\* \[The Previous
Question is a technical name for this motion, conveying a wrong
impression of its import, as it has nothing to do with the subject
previously under consideration. To demand the previous question is
equivalent in effect to moving “That debate now cease, and the assembly
immediately proceed to vote on the questions before it,” (the exceptions
are stated above). The English Previous Question is an entirely
different one from ours, and is used for a different purpose. In the
English Parliament it is moved by the enemies of a measure, who then
vote in the negative, and thus prevent for the day, the consideration of
the main question, (which in this country could be accomplished by
“objecting to the consideration of the question” \[§ 15\], if the
objection were sustained). In our Congress, it is moved by the friends
of a measure, who vote in the affirmative with a view to cutting off
debate and immediately bringing the assembly to a vote on the questions
before it. The rules in the two cases are as different as the objects of
the motions. It requires only a majority vote for its adoption in the
House of Representatives, and is not allowed in the United States
Senate.\] takes precedence of every debatable question \[§ 35\], and
yields to Privileged \[§ 9\] and Incidental \[§ 8\] questions, and to
the motion to Lie on the table \[§ 19\]. It is not debatable, and cannot
be amended or have any other Subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion applied to it. It
shall require a two-thirds vote for its adoption.

When a member calls for the previous question, and the call is seconded,
the presiding officer must immediately put the question: “Shall the main
question be now put?” If adopted, the member who introduced the pending
measure still has the right to close the debate \[§ 34\]; after which
the presiding officer, without allowing further discussion, shall put to
vote the questions before the assembly, in their order of precedence,
till the main question, with all its subsidiary and incidental
questions, is disposed of (see the exceptions below). If it fails, the
discussion continues as if this motion had not been made.

The previous question can be moved on a pending amendment, and if
adopted, debate is closed on the amendment only. After the amendment is
voted on, the main question is again open to debate and amendments. \[In
this case the form of the question would be similar to this : “Shall the
amendment be now put to the question?”\]

The Object of this motion is to bring the assembly to a vote on the
question before it without further debate. In ordinary assemblies it is
rarely expedient to deprive a large minority of the right of debate, and
yet two-thirds of the members should have the right to close the debate
when they think it best.

It applies to questions of privilege \[§ 12\] as well as any other
debatable questions. It is allowable for a member to submit a resolution
and at the same time move the previous question thereon.

To illustrate the Effect of this motion, suppose it is adopted when we
have before the assembly, (a) the main question; (b) an amendment; (c) a
motion to commit; (d) a motion to amend the last motion by giving the
committee instructions. The previous question being carried, the
presiding officer would immediately put the question on the last motion
(d); then on the motion to commit, (c); and if this is adopted, of
course the subject is referred to the committee and disposed of for the
present; but if it fails, the amendment (b) is put, and finally the main
question.

Exceptions: If the Previous Question is carried while a motion to
Postpone is pending, its effect is only to bring the assembly to a vote
on that motion; if it is voted not to postpone, the subject is again
open for debate. So if an Appeal \[§ 14\] or a motion to Reconsider \[§
27\] is pending when the Previous Question is ordered, it applies only
to them and is exhausted by the vote on them.

An affirmative vote on the motion to Commit \[§ 22\] exhausts the
Previous Question, and if the vote is reconsidered, it is divested of
the Previous Question.

\[For other methods of closing debate see § 37 and § 58\].

<span id="sec21"></span>21. To Postpone to a Certain Day. This motion
takes precedence of a motion to Commit, or Amend, or Indefinitely
Postpone, and yields to any Privileged \[§ 9\] or Incidental \[§ 8\]
question, and to the motion to Lie on the Table, or for the Previous
Question. It can be amended by altering the time, and the Previous
Question can be applied to it without affecting any other motions
pending. It allows of very limited debate \[§ 35\], and that must not go
into the merits of the subject matter any further than is necessary to
enable the assembly to judge the propriety of the postponement.

The Effect of this motion is to postpone the entire subject to the time
specified, until which time it cannot be taken up except by a two-thirds
vote \[§ 13\]. When that time arrives it is entitled to be taken up in
preference to every thing except Privileged questions. Where several
questions are postponed to different times and are not reached then,
they shall be considered in the order of the times to which they were
postponed. It is not in order to postpone to a time beyond that session
\[§ 42\] of the assembly, except\* \[In Congress a motion cannot be
postponed to the next session, but it is customary in ordinary
societies.\] to the day of the next session when it comes up with the
unfinished business, and consequently takes precedence of new business
\[§ 44\]. If it is desired to hold an adjourned meeting to consider a
special subject, the time to which the assembly shall adjourn \[§ 10\]
should be first fixed before making the motion to postpone the subject
to that day.

<span id="sec22"></span>22. To Commit \[or Recommit as it is called when
the subject has been previously committed\]. This motion takes
precedence of the motions to Amend or Indefinitely Postpone, and yields
to any Privileged \[§ 9\] or Incidental \[§ 8\] Question, and also to
the motion to Lie on the Table, or for the Previous Question, or to
Postpone to a certain day. It can be amended by altering the committee,
or giving it instructions. It is debatable, and opens to debate \[§ 35\]
the merits of the question it is proposed to commit.

The Form of this motion is “to refer the subject to a committee.” When
different committees are proposed they should he voted in the following
order: (1) Committee the whole \[§ 32\], (2) a standing committee, and
(3) a special (or select) committee. The number of a committee is
usually decided without the formality of a motion, as in filling blanks
\[§ 25\]: the Chairman asks “of how many shall the committee consist?”
and a question is then put upon each number suggested, beginning with
the largest. The number and kind of the committee need not be decided
till after it has been voted to refer the subject to a committee. If the
committee is a select one, and the motion does not include the method of
appointing it, and there is no standing rule on the subject, the
Chairman inquires how the committee shall be appointed, and this is
usually decided informally. Sometimes the Chair “appoints,” in which
case he names the members of the committee and no vote is taken upon
them; or the committee is “nominated” either by the Chair or members of
the assembly (no member nominating more than one except by general
consent), and then they are all voted upon together, except where more
nominations are made than the number of the committee, when they shall
be voted upon singly.

Where a committee is one for action (a committee of arrangements for
holding a public meeting, for example), it should generally be small,
and no one placed upon it who is not favorable to the proposed action;
and if any such should be appointed he should ask to be excused. But
when the committee is for deliberation or investigation, it is of the
utmost importance that all parties be represented on it, so that in
committee the fullest discussion may take place, and thus diminish the
chances of unpleasant debates in the assembly.

In ordinary assemblies, by judicious appointment of committees, debates
upon delicate and troublesome questions can be mostly confined to the
committees, which will contain the representative members of all
parties. \[See Reports of Committees, § 29.\]

<span id="sec23"></span>23. To Amend. This motion takes precedence of
nothing but the question which it proposed to amend, and yields to any
Privileged \[§ 9\], Incidental \[§ 8\] or Subsidiary \[§ 7\] Question,
except to Indefinitely Postpone. It can be amended itself, but this
“amendment of an amendment” cannot be amended. An Amendment may be
inconsistent with one already adopted, or may directly conflict with the
spirit of the original motion, but it must have a direct bearing upon
the subject of that motion. To illustrate: a motion for a vote of thanks
could be amended by substituting for “thanks” the word “censure;” or one
condemning certain customs could be amended by adding other customs.

An Amendment may be in any of the following forms: (a) to “add or
insert” certain words or paragraphs; (b) to “strike out” certain words
or paragraphs, the question, however, being stated by the Chair thus:
“Shall these words (or paragraphs) stand as a part of the resolution?”
and if this is adopted (that is, the motion to “strike out,” fails) it
does not preclude either amendment or a motion to “strike out and
insert;” (c) “to strike certain words and insert others,” which motion
is indivisible, and if lost does not preclude another motion to strike
out the same words and insert different ones; (d) to “substitute”
another motion on the same subject for the one pending; (e) to “divide
the question” into two or more questions, as the mover specifies, so as
to get a separate vote on any particular point or points \[see § 4\].

If a paragraph is inserted it should be perfected by its friends
previous to voting on it, as when once inserted it cannot be struck out
or amended except by adding to it. The same is true in regard to words
to be inserted in a resolution, as when once inserted they cannot be
struck out, except by a motion to strike out the paragraph, or such a
portion of it as shall make the question an entirely different one from
that of inserting the particular words. The principle involved is that
when the assembly has voted that certain words shall form a part of a
resolution, it is not in order to make another motion which involves
exactly the same question as the one they have decided. The only way to
bring it up again is to move a Reconsideration \[§ 27\] of the vote by
which the words were inserted.

In stating the question on an Amendment the Chairman should read (1) the
passage to be amended; (2) the words to be struck out, if any; (3) the
words to be inserted, if any; and (4) the whole passage as it will stand
if the amendment is adopted. \[For amending reports of committees, and
propositions containing several paragraphs, see § 44.\]

The numbers prefixed to paragraphs are only marginal indications, and
should be corrected, if necessary, by the clerk, without any motion to
amend.

The following motions cannot be amended:

To Adjourn (when unqualified) ………………………. See § 11.  
  For the Orders of the Day ………………………….. ” § 12.  
  All Incidental Questions …………………………… ” § 8.  
  To Lie on the Table ……………………………….. ” § 19.  
  For the Previous Question ………………………….. ” § 20.  
  An Amendment of an Amendment ……………………….. ” § 23.  
  To Postpone Indefinitely …………………………… ” § 24.  
  Reconsider ……………………………………….. ” § 27.

An Amendment to Rules of Order, By-Laws or a Constitution shall require
previous notice and a two-thirds vote for its adoption \[see § 45\].

<span id="sec24"></span>24. To Postpone Indefinitely. This motion takes
precedence of nothing except the Principal Question \[§ 6\], and yields
to any Privileged \[§ 9\], Incidental \[§ 8\] or Subsidiary \[§ 7\]
Motion, except to Amend. It cannot be amended; it opens to debate the
entire question which it is proposed to postpone. Its effect is to
entirely remove the question from before the assembly for that session
\[§ 42\].

The Previous Question \[§ 20\], if ordered when this motion is pending,
applies only to it without affecting the main question.

### <span id="art03d"></span>Miscellaneous Motions. \[§§ 25-27.\]

<span id="sec25"></span>25. Filling Blanks. In filling blanks the
largest sum and the longest time proposed shall be first put to the
question. Sometimes the most convenient way of amending a resolution is
to create a blank by moving to strike out a certain number or time. It
is customary for any number of members to propose numbers to fill a
blank without the formality of a motion, these different propositions
not being regarded in the light of amendments.

Nominations are treated in a similar manner, so that the second
nomination, instead of being an amendment to the first, is an
independent motion, which, if the first fails, is to be immediately
voted upon. Any number of nominations can be made, the Chairman
announcing each name as he hears it, and they should be voted upon in
the order announced, until one receives a vote sufficient for an
election.

<span id="sec26"></span>26. Renewal of a Motion. When any Principal
Question \[§ 6\] or Amendment has been once acted upon by the assembly,
it cannot be taken up again at the same session \[§ 42\] except by a
motion to Reconsider \[§ 27\]. The motion to Adjourn can be renewed if
there has been progress in debate, or any business transacted. As a
general rule the introduction of any motion that alters the state of
affairs makes it admissible to renew any Privileged or Incidental motion
(excepting Suspension of the Rules as provided in § 18), or Subsidiary
motion (excepting an amendment), as in such a case the real question
before the assembly is a different one.

To illustrate: a motion that a question lie on the table having failed,
suppose afterwards it be moved to refer the matter to a committee, it is
now in order to move again that the subject lie on the table; but such a
motion would not be in order, if it were not made till after the failure
of the motion to commit, as the question then resumes its previous
condition.

When a subject has been referred to a committee which reports at the
same meeting, the matter stands before the assembly as if it had been
introduced for the first time. A motion which has been withdrawn has not
been acted upon, and therefore can be renewed.

<span id="sec27"></span>27. Reconsider. It is in order at any time, even
when another member has the floor, or while the assembly is voting on
the motion to Adjourn, during the day\* \[In Congress any one can move a
reconsideration, excepting where the vote is taken by yeas and nays \[§
38\], when the rule above applies. The motion can be made on the same or
succeeding day.\] on which a motion has been acted upon, to move to
“Reconsider the vote” and have such motion “entered on the record,” but
it cannot be considered while another question is before the assembly.
It must be made, excepting when the vote is by ballot, by a member who
voted with the prevailing side; for instance, in case a motion fails to
pass for lack of a two-thirds vote, a reconsideration must be moved by
one who voted against the motion.

A motion to reconsider the vote on a Subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion takes
precedence of the main question. It yields to Privileged \[§ 9\]
questions (except for the Orders of the Day), and Incidental \[§ 8\]
questions.

This motion can be applied\* \[It is not the practice to reconsider an
affirmative vote on the motion to lie on the table, as the same result
can be more easily reached by the motion to take from the table. For a
similar reason, an affirmative vote on the motion to take from the table
cannot be reconsidered.\] to every question, except to Adjourn and to
Suspend the Rules. It is debatable or not, just as the question to be
reconsidered is debatable or undebatable \[§ 35\]; when debatable, it
opens up for discussion the entire subject to be reconsidered, and can
have the Previous question \[§ 20\] applied to it without affecting any
thing but the motion to reconsider. It can be laid on the table \[§
19\], and in such cases the last motion cannot be reconsidered; it is
quite common and allowable to combine these two motions (though they
must be voted on separately); in this case, the reconsideration like any
other question, can be taken from the table, but possesses no
privilege.\*\* \[In Congress this is a common method used by the friends
of a measure to prevent its reconsideration.\] The motion to reconsider
being laid on the table does not carry with it the pending measure. If
an amendment to a motion has been either adopted or rejected, and then a
vote taken on the motion as amended, it is not in order to reconsider
the vote on the amendment until after the vote on the original motion
has been reconsidered. If anything which the assembly cannot reverse,
has been done as the result a vote, then that vote cannot be
reconsidered.

The Effect of making this motion is to suspend all action that the
original motion would have required until the reconsideration is acted
upon; but if it is not called up, its effect terminates with the session
\[§ 42\], provided,\* \[In Congress the effect always terminates with
the session, and it cannot be called up by any one but the mover, until
the expiration of the time during which it is in order to move a
reconsideration.\] that in an assembly having regular meetings as often
as monthly, if no adjourned meeting upon another day is held of the one
at which the reconsideration was moved, its effect shall not terminate
till the close of the next succeeding session. \[See note at end of this
section.\] While this motion is so highly privileged as far as relates
to having it entered on the minutes, yet the reconsideration of another
question cannot be made to interfere with the discussion of a question
before the assembly, but as soon as that subject is disposed of, the
reconsideration, if called up, takes precedence of every thing except
the motions to adjourn, and to fix the time to which to adjourn. As long
as its effect lasts (as shown above), any one can call up the motion to
reconsider and have it acted upon—excepting that when its effect extends
beyond the meeting at which the motion was made, no one but the mover
can call it up at that meeting. But the reconsideration of an Incidental
\[§ 8\] or Subsidiary \[§ 7\] motion shall be immediately acted upon, as
otherwise it would prevent action on the main question.

The Effect of the adoption of this motion is to place before the
assembly the original question in the exact position it occupied before
it was voted upon; consequently no one can debate the question
reconsidered who had previously exhausted his right of debate \[§ 34\]
on that question; his only resource is to discuss the question while the
motion to reconsider is before the assembly.

When a vote taken under the operation of the previous question \[§ 20\]
is reconsidered, the question is then divested of the previous question,
and is open to debate and amendment, provided the previous question had
been exhausted \[see latter part of § 20\] by votes taken on all the
questions covered by it, before the motion to reconsider was made.

A reconsideration requires only a majority vote, regardless of the vote
necessary to adopt the motion reconsidered. \[For reconsidering in
committee see § 28\].

Note On Reconsider.—In the English Parliament a vote once taken cannot
be reconsidered, but in our Congress it is allowed to move a
reconsideration of the vote on the same or succeeding day, and after the
close of the last day for making the motion, any one can call up the
motion to reconsider, so that this motion cannot delay action more than
two days, and the effect of the motion, if not acted upon, terminates
with the session. There seems to be no reason or good precedent for
permitting merely two persons, by moving a reconsideration, to suspend
for any length of time all action under resolutions adopted by the
assembly, and yet where the delay is very short the advantages of
reconsideration overbalance the evils.

Where a permanent society has meetings weekly or monthly, and usually
only a small proportion of the society is present, it seems best to
allow a reconsideration to hold over to another meeting, so that the
society may have notice of what action is about to be taken. To prevent
the motion being used to defeat a measure that cannot be deferred till
the next regular meeting, it is provided that in case the society
adjourn, to meet the next day for instance, then the reconsideration
will not hold over beyond that session; this allows sufficient delay to
notify the society, while, if the question is one requiring immediate
action, the delay cannot extend beyond the day to which they adjourn.
Where the meetings are only quarterly or annual, the society should be
properly represented at each meeting, and their best interests are
subserved by following the practice of Congress, and letting the effect
of the reconsideration terminate with the session.

### <span id="art04"></span>Art. IV. Committees and Informal Action. \[§§ 28-33.\]

<span id="sec28"></span>28. Committees. It is usual in deliberative
assemblies, to have all preliminary work in the preparation of matter
for their action, done by means of committees. These may be either
“standing committees” (which are appointed for the session \[§ 42\], or
for some definite time, as one year); or “select committees,” appointed
for a special purpose; or a “committee of the whole” \[§ 32\],
consisting of the entire assembly. \[For method of appointing committees
of the whole, see § 32; other committees, see commit, § 22.\] The first
person named on a committee is chairman, and should act as such, without
the committee should see fit to elect another chairman, which they are
competent to do. The clerk should furnish him, or some other member of
the committee, with notice of the appointment of the committee, giving
the names of the members, the matter referred to them, and such
instructions as the assembly have decided upon. The chairman shall call
the committee together, and if there is a quorum (a majority of the
committee, see § 43,) he should read or have read, the entire
resolutions referred to them; he should then read each paragraph, and
pause for amendments to be offered; when the amendments to that
paragraph are voted on he proceeds to the next, only taking votes on
amendments, as the committee cannot vote on the adoption of matter
referred to them by the assembly.

If the committee originate the resolutions, they vote, in the same way,
on amendments to each paragraph of the draft of the resolutions, (which
draft has been previously prepared by one of their members or a
sub-committee); they do not vote on the separate paragraphs, but having
completed the amendments, they vote on the adoption of the entire
report. When there is a preamble, it is considered last. If the report
originates with the committee, all amendments are to be incorporated in
the report; but, if the resolutions were referred, the committee cannot
alter the text, but must submit the original paper intact, with their
amendments (which may be in the form of a substitute, § 23) written on a
separate sheet.

A committee is a miniature assembly that must meet together in order to
transact business, and usually one of its members should be appointed
its clerk. Whatever is not agreed to by the majority of the members
present at a meeting (at which a quorum, consisting of a majority of the
members of the committee, shall be present) cannot form a part of its
report. The minority may be permitted to submit their views in writing
also, either together, or each member separately, but their reports can
only be acted upon, by voting to substitute one of them for the report
of the committee. The rules of the assembly, as far as possible, shall
apply in committee; but a reconsideration \[§ 27\] of a vote shall be
allowed, regardless of the time elapsed, only when every member who
voted with the majority is present when the reconsideration is moved.\*
\[Both the English common parliamentary law and the rules of Congress
prohibit the reconsideration of a vote by a committee; but the strict
enforcement of this rule in ordinary committees, would interfere with
rather than assist the transaction of business. The rule given above
seems more just, and more in accordance with the practice of ordinary
committees, who usually reconsider at pleasure. No improper advantage
can be taken of the privilege, as long as every member who voted with
the majority must be present when the reconsideration is moved.\] A
committee (except a committee of the whole, § 32\] may appoint a
sub-committee. When through with the business assigned them, a motion is
made for the committee to “rise” (which is equivalent to the motion to
adjourn), and that the chairman (or some member who is more familiar
with the subject) make its report to the assembly. The committee ceases
to exist as soon as the assembly receives the report [\[§ 30\]](/part_1_article_4.html#sec30).

The committee has no power to punish its members for disorderly conduct,
its resource being to report the facts to the assembly. No allusion can
be made in the assembly to what has occurred in committee, except it be
by a report of the committee, or by general consent. It is the duty of a
committee to meet on the call of any two its of members, if the chairman
be absent or decline to appoint such meeting. When a committee adjourns
without appointing a time for the next meeting, it is called together in
the same way as at its first meeting. When a committee adjourns to meet
at another time, it is not necessary (though usually advisable) that
absent members should be notified of the adjourned meeting.

<span id="sec29"></span>29. Forms of Reports of Committees. The form of
a report is usually similar to the following:

A standing committee reports thus: “The committee on \[insert name of
committee\] respectfully report,” \[or “beg leave to report,” or “beg
leave to submit the following report,”\] etc., letting the report
follow.

A select or special committee reports as follows: “The committee to
which was referred \[state the matter referred\] having considered the
same respectfully report,” etc. Or for “The committee” is sometimes
written “Your committee,” or “The undersigned, a committee.”

When a minority report is submitted, it should be in this form (the
majority reporting as above): “The undersigned, a minority of a
committee to which was referred,” etc. The majority report is the report
of the committee, and should never be made out as the report of the
majority.

All reports conclude with, “All of which is respectfully submitted.”
They are sometimes signed only by the chairman of the committee, but if
the matter is of much importance, it is better that the report be signed
by every member who concurs. The report is not usually dated, or
addressed, but can he headed, as for example, “Report of the Finance
Committee of the Y. P. A., on Renting a Hall.”

<span id="sec30"></span>30. Reception of Reports. When the report of a
committee is to be made, the chairman (or member appointed to make the
report) informs the assembly that the committee to whom was referred
such a subject or paper, has directed him to make a report thereon, or
report it with or without amendment, as the case may be; either he or
any other member may move that it be “received”\* \[A very common error
is, after a report has been read, to move that it be received; whereas,
the fact that it has been read, shows that it has been already received
by the assembly. Another mistake, less common, but dangerous, is to vote
that the report be accepted (which is equivalent to adopting it, see §
31), when the intention is only to have the report up for consideration
and afterwards move its adoption. Still a third error is to move that
“the report be adopted and the committee discharged,” when the committee
have reported in full and their report been received, so that the
committee has already ceased to exist. If the committee however have
made but a partial report, or report progress, then it is in order to
move that the committee be discharged from the further consideration of
the subject.\] now or at some other specified time.

Usually the formality of a vote on the reception of a report of a
committee is dispensed with, the time being settled by general consent.
Should any one object, a formal motion becomes necessary. When the time
arrives for the assembly to receive the report, the chairman of the
committee reads it in his place, and then delivers it to the clerk, when
it lies on the table till the assembly sees fit to consider it. If the
report consists of a paper with amendments, the chairman of the
committee reads the amendments with the coherence in the paper,
explaining the alterations and reasons of the committee for the
amendments, till he has gone through the whole. If the report is very
long, it is not usually read until the assembly is ready to consider it
\[see §§ 31 and 44\].

When the report has been received, whether it has been read or not, the
committee is thereby dissolved, and can act no more without it is
revived by a vote to recommit. If the report is recommitted, all the
parts of the report that have not been agreed to by the assembly, are
ignored by the committee as if the report had never been made.

<span id="sec31"></span>31. Adoption of Reports. When the assembly is to
consider a report, a motion should be made to “adopt,” “accept,” or
“agree to” the report, all of which, when carried, have the same effect,
namely, to make the doings of the committee become the acts of the
assembly, the same as if done by the assembly without the intervention
of a committee. If the report contains merely a statement of opinion or
facts, the motion should be to “accept” the report; if it also concludes
with resolutions or certain propositions, the motion should be to “agree
to” the resolutions, or to “adopt” the propositions. After the above
motion is made, the matter stands before the assembly exactly the same
as if there had been no committee, and the subject had been introduced
by the motion of the member who made the report. \[See § 34 for his
privileges in debate, and § 44 for the method of treating a report
containing several propositions, when being considered by the
assembly.\]

<span id="sec32"></span>32. Committee of the Whole. When an assembly has
to consider a subject which it does not wish to refer to a committee,
and yet where the subject matter is not well digested and put into
proper form for its definite action, or, when for any other reason, it
is desirable for the assembly to consider a subject with all the freedom
of an ordinary committee, it is the practice to refer the matter to the
“Committee of the Whole.”\* \[In large assemblies, such as the U. S.
House of Representatives, where a member can speak to any question but
once, the committee of the whole seems almost a necessity, as it allows
the freest discussion of a subject, while at any time it can rise and
thus bring into force the strict rules of the assembly.\]

If it is desired to consider the question at once, the motion is made,
“That the assembly do now resolve itself into a committee of the whole
to take under consideration,” etc., specifying the subject. This is
really a motion to “commit” \[see § 22 for its order of precedence,
etc.\] If adopted, the Chairman immediately calls another member to the
chair, and takes his place as a member of the committee. The committee
is under the rules of the assembly, excepting as stated hereafter in
this section.

The only motions in order are to amend and adopt, and that the committee
“rise and report,” as it cannot adjourn; nor can it order the “yeas and
nays” \[§ 38\]. The only way to close or limit debate in committee of
the whole, is for the assembly to vote that the debate in committee
shall cease at a certain time, or that after a certain time no debate
shall be allowed excepting on new amendments, and then only one speech
in favor of and one against it, of say, five minutes each; or in some
other way regulate the time for debate.\* \[In Congress no motion to
limit debate in committee of the whole is in order till after the
subject has been already considered in committee of the whole. As no
subject would probably be considered more than once in committee of the
whole, in an ordinary society, the enforcement of this rule would
practically prevent such a society from putting any limit to debate in
the committee. The rule as given above, allows the society, whenever
resolving itself into committee of the whole, to impose upon the debate
in the committee, such restrictions as are allowed in Congress after the
subject has already been considered in committee of the whole.\]

If no limit is prescribed, any member may speak as often as he can get
the floor, and as long each time as allowed in debate in the assembly,
provided no one wishes the floor who has not spoken on that particular
question. Debate having been closed at a particular time by order of the
assembly, it is not competent for the committee, even by unanimous
consent, to extend the time. The committee cannot refer the subject to
another committee. Like other committees \[§ 28\], it cannot alter the
text of any resolution referred to it; but if the resolution originated
in the committee, then all the amendments are incorporated in it.

When it is through with the consideration of the subject referred to it,
or if it wishes to adjourn, or to have the assembly limit debate, a
motion is made that “the committee rise and report,” etc., specifying
the result of its proceedings.

This motion “to rise” is equivalent to the motion to adjourn, in the
assembly, and is always in order (except when another member has the
floor), and is undebatable. As soon as this motion is adopted, the
presiding officer takes the chair, and the chairman of the committee,
having resumed his place in the assembly, arises and informs him, that
“the committee have gone through the business referred to them, and that
he is ready to make the report, when the assembly is ready to receive
it;” or he will make such other report as will suit the case.

The clerk does not record the proceedings of the committee on the
minutes, but should keep a memorandum of the proceedings for the use of
the committee. In large assemblies the clerk vacates his chair, which is
occupied by the chairman of the committee, and the assistant clerk acts
as clerk of the committee. Should the committee get disorderly, and the
chairman be unable to preserve order, the presiding officer can take the
chair, and declare the committee dissolved. The quorum of the committee
of the whole is the same as that of the assembly \[§ 43\]. If the
committee finds itself without a quorum, it can only rise and report the
fact to the assembly, which in such a case would have to adjourn.

<span id="sec33"></span>33. Informal Consideration of a Question (or
acting as if in committee of the whole). It has become customary in many
assemblies, instead of going into committee of the whole, to consider
the question “informally,” and afterwards to act “formally.” In a small
assembly there is no objection to this.\* \[In the U. S. Senate all
bills, joint resolutions and treaties, upon their second reading are
considered “as if the Senate were in committee of the whole,” which is
equivalent to considering them informally. \[U. S. Senate Rules 28 and
38.\] In large assemblies it is better to follow the practice of the
House of Representatives, and go into committee of the whole.\] While
acting informally upon any resolutions, the assembly can only amend and
adopt them, and without further motion the Chairman announces that “the
assembly acting informally \[or as in committee of the whole\] has had
such a subject under consideration, and has made certain amendments,
which he will report.” The subject comes before the assembly then as if
reported by a committee. While acting informally, the Chairman retains
his seat, as it is not necessary to move that the committee rise, but at
any time the adoption of such motions as to adjourn, the previous
question, to commit, or any motion except to amend or adopt, puts an end
to the informal consideration; as for example, the motion to commit is
equivalent to the following motions when in committee of the whole: (1)
That the committee rise; (2) that the committee of the whole be
discharged from the further consideration of the subject, and (3) that
it be referred to a committee.

While acting informally, every member can speak as many times as he
pleases, and as long each time as permitted in the assembly \[§ 34\],
and the informal action may be rejected or altered by the assembly.
While the clerk should keep a memorandum of the informal proceedings, it
should not be entered on the minutes, being only for temporary use. The
Chairman’s report to the assembly of the informal action, should be
entered on the minutes, as it belongs to the assembly’s proceedings.

### <span id="art05"></span>Art. V. Debate and Decorum. \[§§ 34-37.\]

<span id="sec34"></span>34. Debate.\* \[In connection with this section
read §§ 1-5.\] When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by
the Chairman before being debated \[see § 3\]. When any member is about
to speak in debate, he shall rise and respectfully address himself to
“Mr. Chairman.” \[“Mr. President” is used where that is the designated
title of the presiding officer; “Brother Moderator” is more common in
religious meetings.\] The Chairman shall then announce his name \[see §
2\]. By parliamentary courtesy, the member upon whose motion a subject
is brought before the assembly is first entitled to the floor, even
though another member has risen first and addressed the Chair; \[in case
of a report of a committee, it is the member who presents the report\] ;
and this member is also entitled to close the debate, but not until
every member choosing to speak, has spoken. This right to make the last
speech upon the question, is not taken away by the Previous Question \[§
20\] being ordered, or in any other way. With this exception, no member
shall speak more than twice to the same question (only once to a
question of order, § 14), nor longer than ten minutes at one time,
without leave of the assembly, and the question upon granting the leave
shall be decided by a majority vote without debate.\* \[The limit in
time should vary to suit circumstances, but the limit of two speeches of
ten minutes each will usually answer in ordinary assemblies, and it can
be increased, when desirable, by a majority vote as shown above, or
diminished as shown in § 37. In the U. S. House of Representatives no
member can speak more than once to the same question, nor longer than
one hour. The fourth rule of the Senate is as follows: “No Senator shall
speak more than twice in any one debate on the same day, without leave
of the Senate, which question shall be decided without debate.” If no
rule is adopted, each member can speak but once to the same question.\]

If greater freedom is desired, the proper course is to refer the subject
to the committee of the whole \[§ 32\], or to consider it informally \[§
33\]. \[For limiting or closing the debate, see § 37.\] No member can
speak the second time to a question, until every member choosing to
speak has spoken. But an amendment, or any other motion being offered,
makes the real question before the assembly a different one, and, in
regard to the right to debate, is treated as a new question. Merely
asking a question, or making a suggestion, is not considered as
speaking.

<span id="sec35"></span>35. Undebatable Questions. The following
questions shall be decided without debate, all others being debatable
\[see note at end of this section\]:

—To Fix the Time to which the Assembly shall Adjourn (when a privileged
question, § 10).  
—To Adjourn \[§ 11\], (or in committee, to rise, which is used instead
of to adjourn).  
—For the Orders of the Day \[§ 13\], and questions relating to the
priority of business.  
—An Appeal \[§ 14\] when made while the Previous Question is pending, or
when simply relating to indecorum or transgressions of the rules of
speaking, or to the priority of business.  
—Objection to the Consideration of a Question \[§ 15\].  
—Questions relating to Reading of Papers \[§ 16\], or Withdrawing a
Motion \[§ 17\], or Suspending the Rules \[§ 18\], or extending the
limits of debate \[§ 34\], or limiting or closing debate, or granting
leave to continue his speech to one who has been guilty of indecorum in
debate \[§ 36\].  
—To Lie on the Table or to Take from the Table \[§ 19\].  
—The Previous Question \[§ 20\].  
—To Reconsider \[§ 26\] a question which is itself undebatable.

The motion to Postpone to a certain time \[§ 21\] allows of but very
limited debate, which must be confined to the propriety of the
postponement; but to Reconsider a debatable question \[§ 26\], or to
Commit \[§ 22\], or Indefinitely Postpone \[§ 24\], opens the main
question \[§ 6\] to debate. To Amend \[§ 23\] opens the main question to
debate only so far as it is necessarily involved in the amendment.

The distinction between debate and making suggestions or asking a
question, should always be kept in view, and when the latter will assist
the assembly in determining the question, is allowed to a limited
extent, even though the question before the assembly is undebatable.

Note On Undebatable Questions.—The English common parliamentary law
makes all motions debatable, without there is a rule adopted limiting
debate \[Cushing’s Manual, § 330\]; but every assembly is obliged to
restrict debate upon certain motions. The restrictions to debate
prescribed in this section conform to the practice of Congress, where,
however, it is very common to allow of brief remarks upon the most
undebatable questions, sometimes five or six members speaking; this of
course is allowed only when no one objects.

By examining the above list, it will be found, that, while free debate
is allowed upon every principal question \[§ 6\], it is permitted or
prohibited upon other questions in accordance with the following
principles:

\(a\) Highly privileged questions, as a rule, should not be debated, as
in that case they could be used to prevent the assembly from coming to a
vote on the main question; (for instance, if the motion to adjourn were
debatable, it could be used \[see § 11\] in a way to greatly hinder
business). High privilege is, as a rule, incompatible with the right of
debate on the privileged question.

\(b\) A motion that has the effect to suppress a question before the
assembly, so that it cannot again be taken up that session \[§ 42\],
allows of free debate. And a subsidiary motion \[§ 7, except commit,
which see below,\] is debatable to just the extent that it interferes
with the right of the assembly to take up the original question at its
pleasure.

Illustrations: To “Indefinitely Postpone” \[§ 24\] a question, places it
out of the power of the assembly to again take it up during that
session, and consequently this motion allows of free debate, even
involving the whole merits of the original question.

To “Postpone to a certain time” prevents the assembly taking up the
question till the specified time, and therefore allows of limited debate
upon the propriety of the postponement.

To “Lie on the Table” leaves the question so that the assembly can at
any time consider it, and therefore should not be, and is not debatable.

To “Commit” would not be very debatable, according to this rule, but it
is an exception, because it is often important that the committee should
know the views of the assembly on the question, and it therefore is not
only debatable, but opens to debate the whole question which it is
proposed to refer to the committee.

<span id="sec36"></span>36. Decorum in Debate \[see § 2\]. In debate a
member must confine himself to the question before the assembly, and
avoid personalities. He cannot reflect upon any act of the assembly,
unless he intends to conclude his remarks with a motion to rescind such
action, or else while debating such motion. In referring to another
member, he should, as much as possible, avoid using his name, rather
referring to him as “the member who spoke last,” or in some other way
describing him. The officers of the assembly should always be referred
to by their official titles. It is not allowable to arraign the motives
of a member, but the nature or consequences of a measure may be
condemned in strong terms. It is not the man, but the measure, that is
the subject of debate. If at any time the Chairman rises to state a
point of order, or give information, or otherwise speak, within his
privilege \[see § 40\], the member speaking must take his seat till the
Chairman has been first heard. When called to order, the member must sit
down until the question of order is decided. If his remarks are decided
to be improper, he cannot proceed, if any one objects, without the leave
of the assembly expressed by a vote, upon which question there shall be
no debate.

Disorderly words should be taken down by the member who objects to them,
or by the clerk, and then read to the member; if he denies them, the
assembly shall decide by a vote whether they are his words or not. If a
member cannot justify the words he used, and will not suitably apologize
for using them, it is the duty of the assembly to act in the case,
requiring both members to withdraw\* \[If both are personally
interested. \[See page 161.\]\] till it has decided its course, it being
a general rule that no member should he present in the assembly when any
matter relating to himself is under debate. If any business has taken
place since the member spoke, it is too late to take notice of any
disorderly words he used.

<span id="sec37"></span>37. Closing Debate. Debate upon a question is
not closed by the Chairman rising to put the question, as, until both
the affirmative and negative are put, a member can claim the floor, and
re-open debate \[see § 38\]. Debate can be closed by the following
motions, which are undebatable \[§ 35\], and, except to Lie on the
Table, shall require a two-thirds\* \[In Congress, where each speaker
can occupy the floor one hour, any of these motions to cut off debate
can be adopted by a mere majority. In ordinary societies harmony is so
essential, that a two-thirds vote should be required to force the
assembly to a final vote without allowing free debate.\] vote for their
adoption \[§ 39\]:

\(a\) An objection to the consideration of a question \[only allowable
when the question is first introduced, § 15\], which, if sustained, not
only stops debate, but also throws the subject out of the assembly for
that session \[§ 42\]; which latter effect is the one for which it was
designed.

\(b\) To lie on the table \[§ 19\], which, if adopted, carries the
question to the table, from which it cannot be taken without a majority
favors such action.

\(c\) The previous question \[§ 20\], which has the effect of requiring
all the questions before the assembly \[excepting as limited in § 20\]
to be put to vote at once without further debate. It may be applied
merely to an amendment or to an amendment of an amendment.

\(d\) For the assembly to adopt an order (1) limiting debate upon a
special subject, either as to the number or length of the speeches; or
(2) closing debate upon the subject at a stated time, when all pending
questions shall be put to vote without further debate. Either of these
two measures may be applied only to a pending amendment, or an amendment
thereto, and when this is voted upon, the original question is still
open to debate and amendment.

### <span id="art06"></span>Art. VI. Vote. \[§§ 38-39.\]

<span id="sec38"></span>38. Voting. Whenever from the nature of the
question it permits of no modification or debate, the Chairman
immediately puts it to vote; if the question is debatable, when the
Chairman thinks the debate has been brought to a close, he should
inquire if the assembly is ready for the question, and if no one rises
he puts the question to vote. There are various forms for putting the
question, in use in different parts of the country. The rule in
Congress, in the House of Representatives, is as follows: “Questions
shall be distinctly put in this form, to-wit: ‘As many as are of the
opinion that (as the question may be) say Aye;’ and after the
affirmative voice is expressed, ‘As many as are of the contrary opinion,
say No.’” The following form is very common: “It has been moved and
seconded that (here state the question). As many as are favor of the
motion say Aye; those opposed, No.” Or, if the motion is for the
adoption of a certain resolution, after it has been read the Chairman
can say, “You have heard the resolution read; those in favor of its
adoption will hold up the right hand; those opposed will manifest it by
the same sign.” These examples are sufficient to show the usual methods
of putting a question, the affirmative being always put first.

When a vote is taken, the Chairman should always announce the result in
the following form: “The motion is carried—the resolution is adopted,”
or, “The ayes have it—the resolution is adopted.” If, when he announces
a vote, any member rises and states that he doubts the vote, or calls
for a “division,” the Chairman shall say, “A division is called for;
those in favor of the motion will rise.” After counting these, and
announcing the number, he shall say, “Those opposed will rise.” will
count these, announce the number, and declare the result; that is,
whether the motion is carried or lost. Instead of counting the vote
himself, he can appoint tellers to make the count and report to him.
When tellers are appointed, they should be selected from both sides of
the question. A member has the right to change his vote (when not made
by ballot) before the decision of the question has been finally and
conclusively pronounced by the Chair, but not afterwards.

Until the negative is put, it is in order for any member, in the same
manner as if the voting had not been commenced, to rise and speak, make
motions for amendment or otherwise, and thus renew the debate; and this,
whether the member was in the assembly room or not when the question was
put and the vote partly taken. In such case the question is in the same
condition as if it had never been put.

No one can vote on a question affecting himself, but if more than one
name is included in the resolution (though a sense of delicacy would
prevent this right being exercised, excepting when it would change the
vote) all are entitled to vote; for if this were not so, a minority
could control an assembly by including the names of a sufficient number
in a motion, say for preferring charges against them, and suspend them,
or even expel them from the assembly. When there is a tie vote the
motion fails, without the Chairman gives his vote for the affirmative,
which in such case he can do. Where his vote will make a tie, he can
cast it and thus defeat the measure.

Another form of voting is by ballot. This method is only adopted when
required by the constitution or by-laws of the assembly, or when the
assembly has ordered the vote to be so taken. The Chairman, in such
cases, appoints at least two tellers, who distribute slips of paper upon
which each member, including the Chairman,\* \[Should the Chairman
neglect to vote before the ballots are counted, he cannot then vote
without the permission of the assembly.\] writes his vote; the votes are
then collected, counted by the tellers, and the result reported to the
Chairman, who announces it to the assembly. The Chairman announces the
result of the vote, in case of an election to office, in a manner
similar to the following: “The whole number of votes cast is —; the
number necessary for an election is —; Mr. A. received —; Mr. B. —; Mr.
C. —. Mr. B. having received the required number is elected —.” Where
there is only one candidate for an office, and the constitution requires
the vote to be by ballot, it is common to authorize the clerk to cast
the vote of the assembly for such and such a person; if any one objects
however, it is necessary to ballot in the usual way. So when a motion is
made to make a vote unanimous, it fails if any one objects. In counting
the ballots all blanks are ignored.

The assembly can by a majority vote order that the vote on any question
be taken by Yeas and Nays.\* \[Taking a vote by yeas and nays, which has
the effect to place on the record how each member votes, is peculiar to
this country, and while it consumes a great deal of time, is rarely
useful in ordinary societies. By the Constitution, one-fifth of the
members present can, in either house of Congress, order a vote to be
taken by yeas and nays, and to avoid some of the resulting
inconveniences various rules and customs have been established, which
are ignored in this Manual, as according to it the yeas and nays can
only be ordered by a majority, which prevents its being made use of to
hinder business. In representative bodies it is very useful, especially
where the proceedings are published, as it enables the people to know
how their representatives voted on important measures. In some small
bodies a vote on a resolution must be taken by yeas and nays, upon the
demand of a single member.\] In this method of voting the Chairman
states both sides of the question at once; the clerk calls the roll and
each member as his name is called rises and answers yes or no, and the
clerk notes his answer. Upon the completion of the roll call the clerk
reads over the names of those who answered the affirmative, and
afterwards those in the negative, that mistakes may be corrected; he
then gives the number voting on each side to the Chairman, who announces
the result. An entry must be made in the minutes of the names of all
voting in the affirmative, and also of those in the negative.

The form of putting a question upon which the vote has been ordered to
be taken by yeas and nays, is similar to the following: “As many as are
in favor of the adoption of these resolutions will, when their names are
called, answer yes \[or aye\]—those opposed will answer no.” The
Chairman will then direct the clerk to call the roll. The negative being
put at the same time as the affirmative, it is too late, after the
question is put, to renew the debate. After the commencement of the roll
call, it is too late to ask to be excused from voting. The yeas and nays
cannot be ordered in committee of the whole \[§ 32\].

<span id="sec39"></span>39. Motions Requiring More than a Majority
Vote.\* \[Where no rule to the contrary is adopted, a majority vote of
the assembly, when a quorum \[§ 43\] is present, is sufficient for the
adoption of any motion, except for the suspension of a rule, which can
only be done by general consent, or unanimously. Congress requires a
two-thirds vote for only the motions to suspend and to amend the Rules,
to take up business out of its proper order, and to make a special order
\[see note to § 37\].\] The following motions shall require a two-thirds
vote for their adoption, as the right of discussion, and the right to
have the rules enforced, should not be abridged by a mere majority:

An Objection to the Consideration of a Question ………….. § 15.  
  To Take up a Question out of its proper order ……………. § 13.  
  To Suspend the Rules ………………………………….. § 18.  
  The Previous Question …………………………………. § 20.  
  To Close or Limit Debate ………………………………. § 37.  
  To Amend the Rules (requires previous notice also) ……….. § 43.  
  To Make a special order ……………………………….. § 13.

### <span id="art07"></span>Art. VII. The Officers and the Minutes. \[§§ 40, 41.\]

<span id="sec40"></span>40. Chairman\* \[In connection with this section
read § 44, and also § 40, 41.\] or President. The presiding officer,
when no special title has been assigned him, is ordinarily called the
Chairman (or in religious assemblies more usually the Moderator);
frequently the constitution of the assembly prescribes for him a title,
such as President.

His duties are generally as follows:

To open the session at the time at which the assembly is to meet, by
taking the chair and calling the members to order; to announce the
business before the assembly in the order in which it is to be acted
upon \[§ 44\]; to state and to put to vote \[§ 38\] all questions which
are regularly moved, or necessarily arise in the course of proceedings,
and to announce the result of the vote;

To restrain the members, when engaged in debate, within the rules of
order; to enforce on all occasions the observance of order and decorum
\[§ 36\] among the members, deciding all questions of order (subject to
an appeal to the assembly by any two members, § 14), and to inform the
assembly when necessary, or when referred to for the purpose, on a point
of order or practice;

To authenticate, by his signature, when necessary, all the acts, orders
and proceedings of the assembly, and in general to represent and stand
for the assembly, declaring its will, and in all things obeying its
commands.

The chairman shall rise\* \[It is not customary for the chairman to rise
while putting questions in very small bodies, such as committees, boards
of trustees, &c.\] to put a question to vote, but may state it sitting;
he shall also rise from his seat (without calling any one to the chair),
when speaking to a question of order, which he can do in preference to
other members. In referring to himself he should always use his official
title thus: “The Chair decides so and so,” not “I decide, &c.” When a
member has the floor, the chairman cannot interrupt him as long as he
does not transgress any of the rules of the assembly, excepting as
provided in § 2.

He is entitled to vote when the vote is by ballot,\* \[But this right is
lost if he does not use it before the tellers have commenced to count
the ballots. The assembly can give leave to the chairman to vote under
such circumstances.\] and in all other cases where the vote would change
the result. Thus in a case where two-thirds vote is necessary, and his
vote thrown with the minority would prevent the adoption of the
question, he can cast his vote; so also he can vote with the minority
when it will produce a tie vote and thus cause the motion to fail.
Whenever a motion is made referring especially to the chairman, the
maker of the motion should put it to vote.

The chairman can, if it is necessary to vacate the chair, appoint a
chairman pro tem.,\*\* \[When there are Vice Presidents, then the first
one on the list that is present, is, by virtue of his office, chairman
during the absence of the President, and should always be called to the
chair when the President temporarily vacates it.\] but the first
adjournment puts an end to the appointment, which the assembly can
terminate before, if it pleases, by electing another chairman. But the
regular chairman, knowing that he will be absent from a future meeting,
cannot authorize another member to act in his place at such meeting; the
clerk \[§ 41\], or in his absence any member, should in such case call
the meeting to order, and a chairman pro tem. be elected, who would hold
office during that session \[§ 42\], without such office was terminated
by the entrance of the regular chairman.

The chairman sometimes calls a member to the chair, and himself takes
part in the debate. But this should rarely be done, and nothing can
justify it in a case where much feeling is shown, and there is a
liability to difficulty in preserving order. If the chairman has even
the appearance of being a partisan, he loses much of his ability to
control those who are on the opposite side of the question.\* \[The
unfortunate habit many chairmen have of constantly speaking upon
questions before the assembly, even interrupting the member who has the
floor, is unjustified by either the common parliamentary law, or the
practice of Congress. One who expects to take an active part in debate
should never accept the chair. “It is a general rule, in all
deliberative assemblies, that the presiding officer shall not
participate in the debate, or other proceedings, in any other capacity
than as such officer. He is only allowed, therefore, to state matters of
fact within his knowledge; to inform the assembly on points of order or
the course of proceeding, when called upon for that purpose, or when he
finds it necessary to do so; and on appeals from his decision on
questions of order, to address the assembly in debate.” \[Cushing’s
Manual, page 106.\] “Though the Speaker \[chairman\] may of right speak
to matters of order and be first heard, he is restrained from speaking
on any other subject except where the assembly have occasion for facts
within his knowledge; then he may, with their leave, state the matter of
fact.” \[Jefferson’s Manual, sec. xvii, and Barclay’s “Digest of the
Rules and Practice of the House of Representatives, U. S.,” page
195.\]\]

The chairman should not only be familiar with parliamentary usage, and
set the example of strict conformity to it, but he should be aman of
executive ability, capable of controlling men; and it should never be
forgotten, that, to control others, it is necessary to control one’s
self. An excited chairman can scarcely fail to cause trouble in a
meeting.

A chairman will often find himself perplexed with the difficulties
attending his position, and in such cases he will do well to heed the
advice of a distinguished writer on parliamentary law, and recollect
that—“The great purpose of all rules and forms, is to subserve the will
of the assembly, rather than to restrain it; to facilitate, and not to
obstruct, the expression of their deliberate sense.”

<span id="sec41"></span>41. Clerk or Secretary \[and the Minutes\]. The
recording officer is usually called the “Clerk” or “Secretary,”\* \[When
there are two secretaries, he is termed the “recording secretary,” and
the other one, the “corresponding secretary.” In many societies the
secretary, besides acting as recording officer, collects the dues of
members, and thus becomes to a certain extent a financial officer. In
most cases the treasurer acts as banker, only paying on the order of the
society, signed by the secretary alone, or by the president and
secretary. In such cases the secretary becomes in reality the financial
officer of the society, and should make reports to the society, of funds
received and from what sources, and of the funds expended and for what
purposes. See § 52 for his duties as financial officer.\] and the record
of proceedings the “Minutes.” His desk should be near that of the
chairman, and in the absence of the chairman, (if there is no vice
president present) when the hour for opening the session arrives, it is
his duty to call the meeting to order, and to preside until the election
of a chairman pro tem., which should be done immediately. He should keep
a record of the proceedings, commencing in a form similar to the
following :\*\* \[See Clerk and Minutes in Part II, § 51.\]

“At a regular quarterly meeting of \[state the name of the society\]
held on the 31st day of March, 1875, at \[state the place of meeting\],
the President in the chair, the minutes were read by the clerk and
approved.” If the regular clerk is absent, insert after the words “in
the chair,” the following: “The clerk being absent, Robert Smith was
appointed clerk pro tem. The minutes were then read and approved.” If
the minutes were not read, say “the reading of the minutes was dispensed
with.” The above form will show the essentials, which are as follows:
(a) The kind of meeting, “regular” \[or stated\] or “special,” or
“adjourned regular,” or “adjourned special;” (6) name of the assembly;
(c) date and place of meeting (excepting when the place is always the
same); (d) the fact of the presence of the regular chairman and clerk,
or in their absence the names of their substitutes; (e) whether the
minutes of the previous meeting were approved.

The minutes should be signed by the person who acted as clerk for that
meeting: in some societies the chairman must also sign them. When
published, they should be signed by both officers.

In keeping the minutes much depends upon the kind of meeting, and
whether the minutes are to be published. If they are to be published, it
is often of far more interest to know what was said by the leading
speakers, than to know what routine business was done, and what
resolutions adopted.

In such case the duties of the secretary are arduous, and he should have
at least one assistant. In ordinary society meetings and meetings of
Boards of Managers and Trustees, on the contrary, there is no object in
reporting the debates; the duty of the clerk, in such cases, is mainly
to record what is “done” by the assembly, not what is said by the
members. Without there is a rule to the contrary, he should enter every
Principal motion \[§ 6\] that is before the assembly, whether it is
adopted or rejected; and where there is a division \[see Voting, § 38\],
or where the vote is by ballot, he should enter the number of votes on
each side; and when the voting is by yeas and nays \[§ 38\], he should
enter a list of the names of those voting on each side. He should
endorse on the reports of committees, the date of their reception, and
what further action was taken upon them, and preserve them among the
records, for which he is responsible. He should in the minutes make a
brief summary of a report that has been agreed to, except where it
contains resolutions, in which case the resolutions will be entered in
full as adopted by the assembly, and not as if it was the report
accepted. The proceedings of the committee of the whole \[§ 32\], or
while acting informally \[§ 33\], should not be entered on the minutes.
Before an adjournment without day, it is customary to read over the
minutes for approval, if the next meeting of the board or society will
not occur for a long period. Where the regular meetings are not
separated by too great a time, the minutes are read at the next meeting.

The clerk should, previous to each meeting, for the use of the chairman,
make out an order of business \[§ 44\], showing in their exact order
what is necessarily to come before the assembly. He should also have at
each meeting a list of all standing committees, and such select
committees as are in existence at the time. When a committee is
appointed, he should hand the names of the committee and all papers
referred to it to the chairman, or some other of its members.

### <span id="art08"></span>Art. VIII. Miscellaneous. \[§§ 42-45.\]

<span id="sec42"></span>42. A Session of an assembly is a meeting\*
\[See definitions in Introduction for the distinction between “meeting”
and “session.”\] which, though it may last for days, is virtually one
meeting, as a session of a Convention; or even months, as a session of
Congress; it terminates by an “adjournment without day.” The
intermediate adjournments from day to day, or the recesses taken during
the day, do not destroy the continuity of the meeting—they in reality
constitute one session. In the case of a permanent society, having
regular meetings every week, month, or year, for example, each meeting
constitutes a separate session of the society, which session however can
be prolonged by adjourning to another day.

If a principal motion \[§ 6\] is indefinitely postponed or rejected at
one session, while it cannot be introduced again at the same session
\[see Renewal of a Motion, § 26\], it can be at the next, without it is
prohibited by a rule of the assembly.

No one session of the assembly can interfere with the rights of the
assembly at any future session,\* \[Any one session can adopt a rule or
resolution of a permanent nature, and it continues in force until at
some future session it is rescinded. But these Standing Rules, as they
are termed, do not interfere with future sessions, because at any moment
a majority can suspend or rescind them, or adopt new ones.\] without it
is expressly so provided in their Constitution, Bylaws, or Rules of
Order, all of which are so guarded (by requiring notice of amendments,
and at least a two-thirds vote for their adoption) that they are not
subject to sudden changes, but may be considered as expressing the
deliberate views of the whole society, rather than the opinions or
wishes of any particular meeting. Thus, if the presiding officer were
ill, it would not be competent for one session of the assembly to elect
a chairman to hold office longer than that session, as it cannot control
or dictate to the next session of the assembly. By going through the
prescribed routine of an election to fill the vacancy, giving whatever
notice is required, it could then legally elect a chairman to hold
office while the vacancy lasted. So it is improper for an assembly to
postpone anything to a day beyond the next succeeding session, and thus
attempt to prevent the next session from considering the question. On
the other hand, it is not permitted to move a reconsideration \[§ 27\]
of a vote taken at a previous session \[though the motion to reconsider
can be called up, provided it was made at the last meeting of the
previous session.\] Committees can be appointed to report at a future
session.

Note On Session—In Congress, and in fact all legislative bodies, the
limits of the sessions are clearly defined; but in ordinary societies
having a permanent existence, with regular meetings more or less
frequent, there appears to be a great deal of confusion upon the
subject. Any society is competent to decide what shall constitute one of
its sessions, but, where there is no rule on the subject, the common
parliamentary law would make each of its regular or special meetings a
separate session, as they are regarded in this Manual.

The disadvantages of a rule making a session include all the meetings of
an ordinary society, held during a long time as one year, are very
great. \[Examine Indefinitely Postpone, § 24, and Renewal of a Motion, §
26.\] If members of any society take advantage of the freedom allowed by
considering each regular meeting a separate session, and repeatedly
renew obnoxious or unprofitable motions, the society can adopt a rule
prohibiting the second introduction of any principal question \[§ 6\]
within, say, three or six months after its rejection, or indefinite
postponement, or after the society has refused to consider it. But
generally it is better to suppress the motion by refusing to consider it
\[§ 15\].

<span id="sec43"></span>43. A Quorum of an assembly is such a number as
is competent to transact its business. Without there is a special rule
on the subject, the quorum of every assembly is a majority of all the
members of the assembly. But whenever a society has any permanent
existence, it is usual to adopt a much smaller number, the quorum being
often less than one-twentieth of its members; this becomes a necessity
in most large societies, where only a small fraction of the members are
ever present at a meeting.\* \[While a quorum is competent to transact
any business, it is usually not expedient to transact important business
without there is a fair attendance at the meeting, or else previous
notice of such action has been given.\]

The Chairman should not take the chair till a quorum is present, except
where there is no hope of there being a quorum, and then no business can
be transacted, except simply to adjourn. So whenever during the meeting
there is found not to be a quorum present, the only thing to be done is
to adjourn—though if no question is raised about it, the debate can be
continued, but no vote taken, except to adjourn.

In committee of the whole, the quorum is the same as in the assembly; in
any other committee the majority is a quorum, without the assembly order
otherwise, and it must wait for a quorum before proceeding to business.
If the number afterwards should be reduced below a quorum, business is
not interrupted, unless a member calls attention to the fact; but no
question can be decided except when a quorum is present. Boards of
Trustees, Managers, Directors, etc., are on the same footing as
committees, in regard to a quorum. Their power is delegated to them as a
body, and what number shall be present in order that they may act as a
Board, is to be decided by the society that appoints the Board. If no
quorum is specified, then a majority constitutes a quorum.

<span id="sec44"></span>44. Order of Business. It is customary for every
society having a permanent existence, to adopt an order of business for
its meetings. When no rule has been adopted, the following is the order:

\(1\) Reading the Minutes of the previous meeting \[and their
approval\].  
(2) Reports of Standing Committees.  
(3) Reports of Select Committees.  
(4) Unfinished Business.  
(5) New Business.

Boards of Managers, Trustees, etc., come under the head of standing
committees. Questions that have been postponed from a previous meeting,
come under the head of unfinished business; and if a subject has been
made a “special order” for the day, it shall take precedence of all
business except reading the minutes. If it is desired to transact
business out of its order, it is necessary to suspend the rules \[§
18\], which can only be done by a two-thirds vote; but as each subject
comes up, a majority can at once lay it on the table \[§ 19\], and thus
reach any question which they desire to first dispose of.

The order of business, in considering any report or proposition
containing several paragraphs,\* \[No vote should be taken on the
adoption of the several paragraphs,—one vote being taken finally on the
adoption of the whole paper. By not adopting separately the different
paragraphs, it is in order, after they have all been amended, to go back
and amend any of them still further. In committee a similar paper would
be treated the same way \[see § 30\]. In § 48 (b) an illustration is
given of the practical application of this section.\] is as follows:

The whole paper should be read entirely through by the clerk; then the
Chairman should read it by paragraphs, pausing at the end of each, and
asking, “Are there any amendments proposed to this paragraph?” If none
are offered, he says, “No amendments being offered to this paragraph,
the next will be read;” he then reads the next, and proceeds thus to the
last paragraph, when he states that the whole report or resolutions have
been read, and are open to amendment. He finally puts the question on
agreeing to or adopting the whole paper as amended. If there is a
preamble it should be read after the last paragraph.

If the paper has been reported back by a committee with amendments, the
clerk reads only the amendments, and the Chairman then reads the first
and puts it to the question, and so on till all the amendments are
adopted or rejected, admitting amendments to the committee’s amendments,
but no others. When through with the committee’s amendments, the
Chairman pauses for any other amendments to be proposed by the assembly;
and when these are voted on, he puts the question on agreeing to or
adopting the paper as amended. Where the resolutions have been just read
by the member presenting them, the reading by the clerk is usually
dispensed with without the formality of a vote. By “suspending the
rules” \[§ 18\], or by general consent, a report can be at once adopted
without following any of the above routine.

<span id="sec45"></span>45. Amendments of Rules of Order. These rules
can be amended at any regular meeting of the assembly, by a two-thirds
vote of the members present, provided the amendment was submitted in
writing at the previous regular meeting. And no amendment to
Constitutions or By-Laws shall be permitted, without at least equal
notice and a two-thirds vote.\* \[Constitutions, By-Laws and Rules of
Order should always prohibit their being amended by less than a
two-thirds vote, and without previous notice of the amendment being
given. If the By-Laws should contain rules that it may be desirable to
occasionally suspend, then they should state how they can be suspended,
just as is done in these Rules of Order, § 18. If there is no such rule
it is impossible to suspend any rule, if a single member objects.
