### <span id="art08"></span>Art. VIII. Miscellaneous

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art08"><strong>Art. VIII.—Miscellaneous</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec42">§ 42. Session</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec43">§ 43. Quorum</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec44">§ 44. Order of business</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec45">§ 45. Amendment of the Rules of Order</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec42"></span>42. A Session of an assembly is a meeting\*
\[See definitions in Introduction for the distinction between “meeting”
and “session.”\] which, though it may last for days, is virtually one
meeting, as a session of a Convention; or even months, as a session of
Congress; it terminates by an “adjournment without day.” The
intermediate adjournments from day to day, or the recesses taken during
the day, do not destroy the continuity of the meeting—they in reality
constitute one session. In the case of a permanent society, having
regular meetings every week, month, or year, for example, each meeting
constitutes a separate session of the society, which session however can
be prolonged by adjourning to another day.

If a principal motion \[§ 6\] is indefinitely postponed or rejected at
one session, while it cannot be introduced again at the same session
\[see Renewal of a Motion, § 26\], it can be at the next, without it is
prohibited by a rule of the assembly.

No one session of the assembly can interfere with the rights of the
assembly at any future session,\* \[Any one session can adopt a rule or
resolution of a permanent nature, and it continues in force until at
some future session it is rescinded. But these Standing Rules, as they
are termed, do not interfere with future sessions, because at any moment
a majority can suspend or rescind them, or adopt new ones.\] without it
is expressly so provided in their Constitution, Bylaws, or Rules of
Order, all of which are so guarded (by requiring notice of amendments,
and at least a two-thirds vote for their adoption) that they are not
subject to sudden changes, but may be considered as expressing the
deliberate views of the whole society, rather than the opinions or
wishes of any particular meeting. Thus, if the presiding officer were
ill, it would not be competent for one session of the assembly to elect
a chairman to hold office longer than that session, as it cannot control
or dictate to the next session of the assembly. By going through the
prescribed routine of an election to fill the vacancy, giving whatever
notice is required, it could then legally elect a chairman to hold
office while the vacancy lasted. So it is improper for an assembly to
postpone anything to a day beyond the next succeeding session, and thus
attempt to prevent the next session from considering the question. On
the other hand, it is not permitted to move a reconsideration \[§ 27\]
of a vote taken at a previous session \[though the motion to reconsider
can be called up, provided it was made at the last meeting of the
previous session.\] Committees can be appointed to report at a future
session.

Note On Session—In Congress, and in fact all legislative bodies, the
limits of the sessions are clearly defined; but in ordinary societies
having a permanent existence, with regular meetings more or less
frequent, there appears to be a great deal of confusion upon the
subject. Any society is competent to decide what shall constitute one of
its sessions, but, where there is no rule on the subject, the common
parliamentary law would make each of its regular or special meetings a
separate session, as they are regarded in this Manual.

The disadvantages of a rule making a session include all the meetings of
an ordinary society, held during a long time as one year, are very
great. \[Examine Indefinitely Postpone, § 24, and Renewal of a Motion, §
26.\] If members of any society take advantage of the freedom allowed by
considering each regular meeting a separate session, and repeatedly
renew obnoxious or unprofitable motions, the society can adopt a rule
prohibiting the second introduction of any principal question \[§ 6\]
within, say, three or six months after its rejection, or indefinite
postponement, or after the society has refused to consider it. But
generally it is better to suppress the motion by refusing to consider it
\[§ 15\].

<span id="sec43"></span>43. A Quorum of an assembly is such a number as
is competent to transact its business. Without there is a special rule
on the subject, the quorum of every assembly is a majority of all the
members of the assembly. But whenever a society has any permanent
existence, it is usual to adopt a much smaller number, the quorum being
often less than one-twentieth of its members; this becomes a necessity
in most large societies, where only a small fraction of the members are
ever present at a meeting.\* \[While a quorum is competent to transact
any business, it is usually not expedient to transact important business
without there is a fair attendance at the meeting, or else previous
notice of such action has been given.\]

The Chairman should not take the chair till a quorum is present, except
where there is no hope of there being a quorum, and then no business can
be transacted, except simply to adjourn. So whenever during the meeting
there is found not to be a quorum present, the only thing to be done is
to adjourn—though if no question is raised about it, the debate can be
continued, but no vote taken, except to adjourn.

In committee of the whole, the quorum is the same as in the assembly; in
any other committee the majority is a quorum, without the assembly order
otherwise, and it must wait for a quorum before proceeding to business.
If the number afterwards should be reduced below a quorum, business is
not interrupted, unless a member calls attention to the fact; but no
question can be decided except when a quorum is present. Boards of
Trustees, Managers, Directors, etc., are on the same footing as
committees, in regard to a quorum. Their power is delegated to them as a
body, and what number shall be present in order that they may act as a
Board, is to be decided by the society that appoints the Board. If no
quorum is specified, then a majority constitutes a quorum.

<span id="sec44"></span>44. Order of Business. It is customary for every
society having a permanent existence, to adopt an order of business for
its meetings. When no rule has been adopted, the following is the order:

\(1\) Reading the Minutes of the previous meeting \[and their
approval\].  
(2) Reports of Standing Committees.  
(3) Reports of Select Committees.  
(4) Unfinished Business.  
(5) New Business.

Boards of Managers, Trustees, etc., come under the head of standing
committees. Questions that have been postponed from a previous meeting,
come under the head of unfinished business; and if a subject has been
made a “special order” for the day, it shall take precedence of all
business except reading the minutes. If it is desired to transact
business out of its order, it is necessary to suspend the rules \[§
18\], which can only be done by a two-thirds vote; but as each subject
comes up, a majority can at once lay it on the table \[§ 19\], and thus
reach any question which they desire to first dispose of.

The order of business, in considering any report or proposition
containing several paragraphs,\* \[No vote should be taken on the
adoption of the several paragraphs,—one vote being taken finally on the
adoption of the whole paper. By not adopting separately the different
paragraphs, it is in order, after they have all been amended, to go back
and amend any of them still further. In committee a similar paper would
be treated the same way \[see § 30\]. In § 48 (b) an illustration is
given of the practical application of this section.\] is as follows:

The whole paper should be read entirely through by the clerk; then the
Chairman should read it by paragraphs, pausing at the end of each, and
asking, “Are there any amendments proposed to this paragraph?” If none
are offered, he says, “No amendments being offered to this paragraph,
the next will be read;” he then reads the next, and proceeds thus to the
last paragraph, when he states that the whole report or resolutions have
been read, and are open to amendment. He finally puts the question on
agreeing to or adopting the whole paper as amended. If there is a
preamble it should be read after the last paragraph.

If the paper has been reported back by a committee with amendments, the
clerk reads only the amendments, and the Chairman then reads the first
and puts it to the question, and so on till all the amendments are
adopted or rejected, admitting amendments to the committee’s amendments,
but no others. When through with the committee’s amendments, the
Chairman pauses for any other amendments to be proposed by the assembly;
and when these are voted on, he puts the question on agreeing to or
adopting the paper as amended. Where the resolutions have been just read
by the member presenting them, the reading by the clerk is usually
dispensed with without the formality of a vote. By “suspending the
rules” \[§ 18\], or by general consent, a report can be at once adopted
without following any of the above routine.

<span id="sec45"></span>45. Amendments of Rules of Order. These rules
can be amended at any regular meeting of the assembly, by a two-thirds
vote of the members present, provided the amendment was submitted in
writing at the previous regular meeting. And no amendment to
Constitutions or By-Laws shall be permitted, without at least equal
notice and a two-thirds vote.\* \[Constitutions, By-Laws and Rules of
Order should always prohibit their being amended by less than a
two-thirds vote, and without previous notice of the amendment being
given. If the By-Laws should contain rules that it may be desirable to
occasionally suspend, then they should state how they can be suspended,
just as is done in these Rules of Order, § 18. If there is no such rule
it is impossible to suspend any rule, if a single member objects.
