### <span id="art14"></span>Art. XIV. Miscellaneous

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art14"><strong>Art. XIV.—Miscellaneous</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec67">§ 67. Forms of stating and putting
questions</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec68">§ 68. Motions requiring a two-thirds vote for their
adoption</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec69">§ 69. Unfinished business</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec70">§ 70. Session</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec71">§ 71. Quorum</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec72">§ 72. Order of Business</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec73">§ 73. Amendment of Constitutions, By-Laws and Rules
of Order</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec74"><strong>Legal Rights of Deliberative
Assemblies</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec75"><strong>Table of Rules Relating to
Motions</strong></a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec67"></span>67. Forms of Stating and Putting Questions.
Whenever a motion has been made and seconded, it is the duty of the
chairman, if the motion is in order, to state the question so that the
assembly may know what question is before them. The seconding of a
motion is required to prevent a question being introduced when only one
member is in favor of it, and consequently but little attention is paid
to it in mere routine motions, or when it is evident that many are in
favor of the motion; in such cases the chairman assumes that the motion
is seconded.

Often in routine work the chairman puts the question without waiting for
even a motion, as few persons like to make such formal motions, and much
time would be wasted by waiting for them: (but the chairman can only do
this as long as no one objects.) The following motions, however, do not
have to be seconded: (a) a call for the orders of the day; (b) a call to
order, or the raising of any question of order; and (c) an objection to
the consideration of a question.

One of the commonest forms of stating a question is to say that, “It is
moved and seconded that,” and then give the motion. When an amendment
has been voted on, the chairman announces the result, and then says,
“The question now recurs on the resolution,” or, “on the resolution as
amended,” as the case may be. So in all cases, as soon as a vote is
taken, he should immediately state the question then before the
assembly, if there be any. If the motion is debatable or can be amended,
the chairman, usually after stating the question, and always before
finally putting it, inquires, “Are you ready for the question?” Some of
the common forms of stating and putting questions are shown in §§ 46-48.
The forms of putting the following questions, are, however, peculiar:

If a motion is made to Strike out certain words, the question is put in
this form: “Shall these words stand as a part of the resolution?” so
that on a tie vote they are struck out.

If the Previous Question is demanded, it is put thus: “Shall the main
question be now put?”

If an Appeal is made from the decision of the Chair, the question is put
thus: “Shall the decision of the Chair stand as the judgment of the
assembly?” \[convention, society, etc.\] If the Orders of the Day are
called for, the question is put thus: “Will the assembly now proceed to
the Orders of the Day?”

When, upon the introduction of a question, some one objects to its
consideration, the chairman immediately puts the question thus: “Will
the assembly consider it?” or, “Shall the question be considered?” \[or
discussed.\]

If the vote has been ordered to be taken by yeas and nays, the question
is put in a form similar to the following: “As many as are in favor of
the adoption of these resolutions, will, when their names are called,
answer yes \[or aye\]—those opposed will answer no.”

<span id="sec68"></span>68. Motions requiring a two-thirds vote.\* \[See
Two-thirds Vote, page 159, and § 39 of Rules of Order.\]

All motions that have the effect to make a variation from the
established rules and customs, should require a two-thirds vote for
their adoption. Among these established customs should be regarded the
right of free debate upon the merits of any measure, before the assembly
can be forced to take final action upon it. The following motions would
come under this rule:

To amend or suspend the rules.  
To make a special order.  
To take up a question out of its proper order.  
An objection to the consideration of a question.  
The Previous Question, or a motion to limit or close debate.

<span id="sec69"></span>69. Unfinished Business. When an assembly
adjourns, the unfinished business comes up at the adjourned meeting, if
one is held, as the first business after the reading of the minutes; if
there is no adjourned meeting, the unfinished business comes up
immediately before new business at the next regular meeting, provided
the regular meetings are more frequent than yearly.\*\* \[See Rules of
Order, § 11, for a fuller explanation of the effect of an adjournment
upon unfinished business, and the Congressional practice.\] If the
meetings are only once a year, the adjournment of the session puts an
end to all unfinished business.

<span id="sec70"></span>70. Session. Each regular meeting of a society
constitutes a separate session. Any meeting which is not an adjournment
of another meeting, commences a new session; the session terminates as
soon as the assembly “adjourns without day.”\* \[In ordinary practice, a
meeting is closed by moving simply “to adjourn;” the society meet again
at the time provided either by their rules or by a resolution of the
society. If they do not meet till the time for the next regular meeting,
as provided in the By-Laws, then the adjournment closed the session, and
was in effect an adjournment without day. If, however, they had
previously fixed the time for the next meeting, either by a direct vote,
or by adopting a programme of exercises covering several meetings or
even days, in either case the adjournment is in effect to a certain day,
and does not close the session.\]

When an assembly has meetings for several days consecutively, they all
constitute one session. Each session of a society is independent of the
other sessions, excepting as expressly provided in their Constitution,
By-Laws, or Rules of Order, and excepting that resolutions adopted by
one session are in force during succeeding sessions until rescinded by a
majority vote \[see note to § 49\].

Where a society holds more than one regular session a year, these rules
limit the independence of each session as follows: (a) The Order of
Business prescribed in § 72 requires that the minutes of the previous
meeting, the reports of committees previously appointed, and the
unfinished business of the last session, shall all take precedence of
new business, and that no subject can be considered out of its proper
order, except by a two-thirds vote; (b) it is allowable to postpone a
question to the next session, when it comes up with unfinished business,
but it is not allowable to postpone to a day beyond the next session,
and thus interfere with the right of the next session to consider the
question; (c) a motion to reconsider a vote can be made at one meeting
and called up at the next meeting even though it be another session,
provided the society holds its regular sessions as frequently as
monthly.\* \[See Rules of Order, § 42, for a full discussion of this
subject.\]

<span id="sec71"></span>71. Quorum. \[See § 43 for full information on
this subject.\]

<span id="sec72"></span>72. Order of Business. Every society should
adopt an order of business adapted to its special wants. The following
is the usual order where no special rule is adopted, and when more than
one regular meeting is held each year:

\(1\) Reading of the minutes of the last meeting.  
(2) Reports of Boards of Trustees or Managers, and Standing
Committees.  
(3) Reports of Select Committees.  
(4) Unfinished Business (including questions postponed to this
meeting).  
(5) New Business.

Business cannot be considered out of its order, except by a two-thirds
vote; but a majority can lay on the table the different questions as
they come up, and thus reach a subject they wish first to consider. If a
subject has been made a Special Order for this meeting, then it is to be
considered immediately after the minutes are read.

<span id="sec73"></span>73. Amendments of Constitutions, By-Laws and
Rules of Order, should be permitted only when adopted by a two-thirds
vote, at a regular meeting of the society, after having been proposed at
the previous regular meeting. If the meetings are very frequent, weekly,
for instance, amendments should be adopted only at the quarterly
meetings, after having been proposed at the previous quarterly meeting.

### <span id="sec74"></span>Legal Rights of Assemblies and the Trial of their Members.

The Right of Deliberative Assemblies to Punish their Members. A
deliberative assembly has the inherent right to make and enforce its own
laws and punish an offender—the extreme penalty, however, being
expulsion from its own body. When expelled, if the assembly is a
permanent society, it has a right, for its own protection, to give
public notice that the person has ceased to be a member of that society.

But it has no right to go beyond what is necessary for self protection
and publish the charges against the member. In a case where a member of
a society was expelled, and an officer of the society published, by
their order, a statement of the grave charges upon which he had been
found guilty, the expelled member recovered damages from the officer, in
a suit for libel—the court holding that the truth of the charges did not
affect the case.

The Right of an Assembly to Eject any one from its place of meeting.
Every deliberative assembly has the right to decide who may be present
during its session, and when the assembly, either by a rule or by a
vote, decides that a certain person shall not remain in the room, it is
the duty of the chairman to enforce the rule or order, using whatever
force is necessary to eject the party.

The chairman can detail members to remove the person, without calling
upon the police. If, however, in enforcing the order, any one uses
harsher treatment than is necessary to remove the person, the courts
have held that he, and he alone is liable to prosecution, just the same
as a policeman would be under similar circumstances. However badly the
man may be abused while being removed from the room, neither the
chairman nor the society are liable for damages, as, in ordering his
removal, they did not exceed their legal rights.

Rights of Ecclesiastical Tribunals. Many of our deliberative assemblies
are ecclesiastical bodies, and it is important to know how much respect
will be paid to their decisions by the civil courts.

A church became divided and each party claimed to be the church, and
therefore entitled to the church property. The case was taken into the
civil courts, and finally, on appeal, to the U. S. Supreme Court, which
held the case under advisement for one year, and then reversed the
decision of the State Court, because it conflicted with the decision of
the highest ecclesiastical court that had acted upon the case. The
Supreme Court, in rendering its decision, laid down the broad principle
that, when a local church is but a part of a larger and more general
organization or denomination, it will accept the decision of the highest
ecclesiastical tribunal to which the case has been carried within that
general church organization, as final, and will not inquire into the
justice or injustice of its decree as between the parties before it. The
officers, the ministers, the members, or the church body which the
highest judiciary of the denomination recognizes, the court will
recognize. Whom that body expels or cuts off, the court will hold to be
no longer members of that church.

Trial of Members of Societies. Every deliberative assembly, having the
right to purify its own body, must therefore have the right to
investigate the character of its members.

It can require any of them to testify in the case, under pain of
expulsion if they refuse. In § 36 is shown the method of procedure when
a member is charged with violating the rules of decorum in debate. If
the disorderly words are of a personal nature, before the assembly
proceeds to deliberate upon the case, both parties to the personality
should retire. It is not necessary for the member objecting to the words
to retire, unless he is personally involved in the case.

When the charge is against the member’s character, it is usually
referred to a committee of investigation or discipline, or to some
standing committee to report upon. Some societies have standing
committees, whose duty it is to report cases for discipline whenever any
are known to them.

In either case the committee investigate the matter and report to the
society. This report need not go into details, but should contain their
recommendations as to what action the society should take, and should
usually close with resolutions covering the case, so that there is no
need for any one to offer any additional resolutions upon it. The
ordinary resolutions, where the member is recommended to be expelled,
are (1) to fix the time to which the society shall adjourn; and (2) to
instruct the clerk to cite the member to appear before the society at
this adjourned meeting to show cause why he should not be expelled, upon
the following charges, which should then be given.

After charges are preferred against a member and the assembly has
ordered that he be cited to appear for trial, he is theoretically under
arrest, and is deprived of all the rights of membership until his case
is disposed of.

The clerk should send the accused a written notice to appear before the
society at the time appointed, and should at the same time furnish him
with a copy of the charges. A failure to obey the summons is generally
cause enough for summary expulsion.

At the appointed meeting, what may be called the trial, takes place.
Frequently the only evidence required against the member is the report
of the committee. After it has been read and any additional evidence
offered that the committee may see fit to introduce, the accused should
be allowed to make an explanation and introduce witnesses if he so
desires. Either party should be allowed to cross-examine the other’s
witnesses and introduce rebutting testimony.

When the evidence is all in, the accused should retire from the room,
and the society deliberate upon the question, and finally act by a vote
upon the question of expulsion or other punishment proposed.

In acting upon the case, it must be borne in mind that there is a vast
distinction between the evidence necessary to convict in a civil court
and that required to convict in an ordinary society or ecclesiastical
body. A notorious pickpocket could not even be arrested, much less
convicted, by a civil court, simply on the ground of being commonly
known as a pickpocket; while such evidence would convict and expel him
from any ordinary society.

The moral conviction of the truth of the charge is all that is necessary
in an ecclesiastical or other deliberative body, to find the accused
guilty of the charges.

If the trial is liable to be long and troublesome, or of a very delicate
nature, the member is frequently cited to appear before a committee,
instead of the society, for trial. In this case the committee report to
the society the result of their trial of the case, with resolutions
covering the punishment which they recommend the society to adopt.

## <span id="sec75"></span>TABLE OF RULES RELATING TO MOTIONS.

\[This Table contains the answers to more than two hundred questions on
parliamentary law, and should always be consulted before referring to
the body of the Manual.\]

Explanation of the Table. A Star shows that the rule heading the column
in which it stands, applies to the motion opposite to which it is
placed: a blank shows that the rule does not apply: a figure shows that
the rule only partially applies, the figure referring to the note on the
next page showing the limitations. Take, for example, “Lie on the
table:” the Table shows that § 19 of the Pocket Manual treats of this
motion; that it is “undebatable” and “cannot be amended;” and that an
affirmative vote on it (as shown in note 3) “cannot be reconsidered:” —
the four other columns being blank, show that this motion does not “open
the main question to debate,” that it does not “require a 2/3 vote,”
that it does “require to be seconded,” and that it is not “in order when
another member has the floor.”

The column headed “Requires a two-thirds vote,” applies only where the
“Pocket Manual of Rules of Order,” or similar rules, have been adopted.
\[See “Two-thirds Vote,” on next page, under Miscellaneous Rules.\]

After the note to the Table is some additional information that a
chairman should always have at hand, such as the Order of Precedence of
Motions, the Forms Of Putting Certain Questions, etc.

In order when another has the floor \[§ 2\]——————-| Requires no Second
\[§ 3\]—————-| | Requires a 2/3 vote \[§ 39\]—See Note 1.————-| | |
Cannot be Reconsidered \[§ 27\]———-| | | | Cannot be Amended \[§
23\]——-| | | | | Opens Main Question to Debate \[§ 35\]—-| | | | | |
Undebatable \[§ 35\]-| | | | | | | |- Section in Pocket Manual | | | | |
| | | | | | | | | | 11 Adjourn ……………………………………… x . x x . . . 10 Adjourn,
Fix the Time to which to ………………. 2 . . . . . . 23 Amend
……………………………………….. . . . . . . . 23 Amend an Amendment ……………………………. . . x
. . . . 43 Amend the Rules ………………………………. . . . . x . . 14 Appeal,
relating to indecorum, etc., \[6\] ………… x . x . . . x 14 Appeal, all
other cases ……………………….. . . x . . . x 14 Call to Order ………………………………… x .
x . . x x 37 Close Debate, motion to ……………………….. x . . . x . . 22 Commit
………………………………………. . x . . . . . 31 Extend the limits of debate, motion to
………….. x . . . . . . 10 Fix the Time to which to Adjourn ……………….. 2 . .
. . . . 15 Leave to continue speaking when guilty of indecorum x . x . .
. . 19 Lie on the Table ……………………………… x . x 3 . . . 37 Limit Debate,
motion to ……………………….. x . . . x . . 13 Objection to Consideration of a
Question \[7\] …….. x . x . x x x 13 Orders of the Day, motion for the
………………. x . x . . x x 21 Postpone to a certain time …………………….. 4 . . . .
. . 24 Postpone indefinitely …………………………. . x x . . . . 20 Previous
Question …………………………….. x . x . x . . 44 Priority of Business, questions
relating to ……… x . . . . . . 16 Reading Papers ……………………………….. x . x . .
. . 27 Reconsider a debatable question ………………… . x x . . . 5 27
Reconsider an undebatable question ……………… x . x . . . 5 22 Refer (same
as Commit) ………………………… . x . . . . . 11 Rise (in Committee equals
Adjourn) ……………… x . x x . . . 11 Shall the question be discussed? \[7\]
……………. x . x . x x x 61 Special Order, to make a ………………………. . . . . x .
. 23 Substitute (same as Amend) …………………….. . . . . . . . 18 Suspend the
Rules …………………………….. x . x x x . . 59 Take from the table …………………………… x .
x 3 . . . 44 Take up a question out of its proper order ………. x . x . x .
. 17 Withdrawal of a motion ………………………… x . x . . . .

### Notes To The Table.

\(1\) This column only applies to assemblies that have adopted these
Rules. If no rules are adopted, a majority vote is sufficient for the
adoption of any motion, except to “suspend the rules,” which requires a
unanimous vote. \[See Two-thirds Vote, below.\]

\(2\) Undebatable if made when another question is before the assembly.

\(3\) An affirmative vote on this motion cannot be reconsidered.

\(4\) Allows of but limited debate upon the propriety of the
postponement.

\(5\) Can be moved and entered on the record when another has the floor,
but cannot interrupt the business then before the assembly; it must be
made on the day the original vote was taken, and by one who voted with
the prevailing side.

\(6\) An appeal is undebatable only when relating to indecorum, or to
transgressions of the rules of speaking, or to the priority of business,
or when made while the Previous Question is pending. When debatable,
only one speech from each member is permitted.

\(7\) The objection can only be made when the question is first
introduced, before debate.

## MISCELLANEOUS RULES.

### Order of Precedence of Motions.

The ordinary motions rank as follows, and any of them (except to amend)
can be made while one of a lower order is pending, but none can
supercede one of a higher order:

To Fix the Time to which to Adjourn.  
To Adjourn (when unqualified).  
For the Orders of the Day.  
To Lie on the Table.  
For the Previous Question.  
To Postpone to a Certain Time.  
To Commit.  
To Amend.  
To Postpone Indefinitely.

The motion to Reconsider can be made when any other question is before
the assembly, but cannot be acted upon until the business then before
the assembly is disposed of \[see note 5 above\], when, if called up, it
takes precedence of all other motions except to adjourn and to fix the
time to which to adjourn. Questions incidental to those before the
assembly, take precedence of them and must be acted upon first.

### Two-thirds Vote.

In Congress the only motions requiring a two-thirds vote, are to suspend
or amend the Rules, to take up business out of its proper order, and to
make a special order. In ordinary societies harmony is so essential,
that a two-thirds vote should be required to force the assembly to a
final vote upon a resolution without allowing free debate. The Table
conforms to the Rules of Order, which are based upon this principle. If
an assembly has adopted no Rules of Order, then a majority vote is
sufficient for the adoption of any motion, except to “suspend the
rules,” which would require a unanimous vote.

### Forms of Putting Certain Questions.

If a motion is made to Strike out certain words, the question is put in
this form: “Shall these words stand as a part of the resolution?” so
that on a tie vote they are struck out.

If the Previous Question is demanded, it is put thus: “Shall the main
question now be put?”

If an Appeal is made from the decision of the Chair, the question is put
thus: “Shall the decision of the Chair stand as the judgement of the
assembly?” \[convention, society, etc.\].

If the Orders of the Day are called for, the question is put thus: “Will
the assembly now proceed to the Orders of the Day?”

When, upon the introduction of a question, some one objects to its
consideration, the chairman immediately puts the question thus: “Will
the assembly consider it?” or “Shall the question be considered?” \[or
discussed.\]

If the vote has been ordered to be taken by yeas and nays, the question
is put in a form similar to the following: “As many as are in favor of
the adoption of these resolutions, will, when their names are called,
answer yes \[or aye\]—those opposed will answer no.”

### Various Forms of Amendments.

An Amendment may be either (1) by “adding” or (2) by “striking out”
words or paragraphs; or (3) by “striking out certain words and inserting
others;” or (4) by “substituting” a different motion on the same
subject; or (5) by “dividing the question” into two or more questions,
so as to get a separate vote on any particular point or points.

### Additions and Corrections.

\[These corrections, though mostly contained in other parts of the
Manual, are also needed in the places here indicated.\]

19th page, 7th line, after “§ 13” insert a star referring to this note:
“See note to § 61.”  
50th ” 2d line of last note, omit all after “reconsideration.”  
51st ” at end of 12th line, insert “upon another day.”  
” ” 10th line, insert a star, referring to this note: “In Congress the
effect always terminates with the session, and it cannot be called up by
any one but the mover, until the expiration of the time during which it
is in order to move a reconsideration.”  
69th ” 4th line, after “§ 34,” insert “or limiting or closing debate.”  
72d ” 17th line, insert a star referring to this note: “If both are
personally interested. \[See p. 161.\]”  
73d ” last line of note, insert “final” before “vote.”  
80th ” add to the list in § 39 the motion “To make a special order.”
