### <span id="art06"></span>Art. VI. Vote

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art06"><strong>Art. Art. VI.—Vote</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec38">§ 38. Voting, various modes of</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec39">§ 39. Motions requiring more than a majority
vote</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec38"></span>38. Voting. Whenever from the nature of the
question it permits of no modification or debate, the Chairman
immediately puts it to vote; if the question is debatable, when the
Chairman thinks the debate has been brought to a close, he should
inquire if the assembly is ready for the question, and if no one rises
he puts the question to vote. There are various forms for putting the
question, in use in different parts of the country. The rule in
Congress, in the House of Representatives, is as follows: “Questions
shall be distinctly put in this form, to-wit: ‘As many as are of the
opinion that (as the question may be) say Aye;’ and after the
affirmative voice is expressed, ‘As many as are of the contrary opinion,
say No.’” The following form is very common: “It has been moved and
seconded that (here state the question). As many as are favor of the
motion say Aye; those opposed, No.” Or, if the motion is for the
adoption of a certain resolution, after it has been read the Chairman
can say, “You have heard the resolution read; those in favor of its
adoption will hold up the right hand; those opposed will manifest it by
the same sign.” These examples are sufficient to show the usual methods
of putting a question, the affirmative being always put first.

When a vote is taken, the Chairman should always announce the result in
the following form: “The motion is carried—the resolution is adopted,”
or, “The ayes have it—the resolution is adopted.” If, when he announces
a vote, any member rises and states that he doubts the vote, or calls
for a “division,” the Chairman shall say, “A division is called for;
those in favor of the motion will rise.” After counting these, and
announcing the number, he shall say, “Those opposed will rise.” will
count these, announce the number, and declare the result; that is,
whether the motion is carried or lost. Instead of counting the vote
himself, he can appoint tellers to make the count and report to him.
When tellers are appointed, they should be selected from both sides of
the question. A member has the right to change his vote (when not made
by ballot) before the decision of the question has been finally and
conclusively pronounced by the Chair, but not afterwards.

Until the negative is put, it is in order for any member, in the same
manner as if the voting had not been commenced, to rise and speak, make
motions for amendment or otherwise, and thus renew the debate; and this,
whether the member was in the assembly room or not when the question was
put and the vote partly taken. In such case the question is in the same
condition as if it had never been put.

No one can vote on a question affecting himself, but if more than one
name is included in the resolution (though a sense of delicacy would
prevent this right being exercised, excepting when it would change the
vote) all are entitled to vote; for if this were not so, a minority
could control an assembly by including the names of a sufficient number
in a motion, say for preferring charges against them, and suspend them,
or even expel them from the assembly. When there is a tie vote the
motion fails, without the Chairman gives his vote for the affirmative,
which in such case he can do. Where his vote will make a tie, he can
cast it and thus defeat the measure.

Another form of voting is by ballot. This method is only adopted when
required by the constitution or by-laws of the assembly, or when the
assembly has ordered the vote to be so taken. The Chairman, in such
cases, appoints at least two tellers, who distribute slips of paper upon
which each member, including the Chairman,\* \[Should the Chairman
neglect to vote before the ballots are counted, he cannot then vote
without the permission of the assembly.\] writes his vote; the votes are
then collected, counted by the tellers, and the result reported to the
Chairman, who announces it to the assembly. The Chairman announces the
result of the vote, in case of an election to office, in a manner
similar to the following: “The whole number of votes cast is —; the
number necessary for an election is —; Mr. A. received —; Mr. B. —; Mr.
C. —. Mr. B. having received the required number is elected —.” Where
there is only one candidate for an office, and the constitution requires
the vote to be by ballot, it is common to authorize the clerk to cast
the vote of the assembly for such and such a person; if any one objects
however, it is necessary to ballot in the usual way. So when a motion is
made to make a vote unanimous, it fails if any one objects. In counting
the ballots all blanks are ignored.

The assembly can by a majority vote order that the vote on any question
be taken by Yeas and Nays.\* \[Taking a vote by yeas and nays, which has
the effect to place on the record how each member votes, is peculiar to
this country, and while it consumes a great deal of time, is rarely
useful in ordinary societies. By the Constitution, one-fifth of the
members present can, in either house of Congress, order a vote to be
taken by yeas and nays, and to avoid some of the resulting
inconveniences various rules and customs have been established, which
are ignored in this Manual, as according to it the yeas and nays can
only be ordered by a majority, which prevents its being made use of to
hinder business. In representative bodies it is very useful, especially
where the proceedings are published, as it enables the people to know
how their representatives voted on important measures. In some small
bodies a vote on a resolution must be taken by yeas and nays, upon the
demand of a single member.\] In this method of voting the Chairman
states both sides of the question at once; the clerk calls the roll and
each member as his name is called rises and answers yes or no, and the
clerk notes his answer. Upon the completion of the roll call the clerk
reads over the names of those who answered the affirmative, and
afterwards those in the negative, that mistakes may be corrected; he
then gives the number voting on each side to the Chairman, who announces
the result. An entry must be made in the minutes of the names of all
voting in the affirmative, and also of those in the negative.

The form of putting a question upon which the vote has been ordered to
be taken by yeas and nays, is similar to the following: “As many as are
in favor of the adoption of these resolutions will, when their names are
called, answer yes \[or aye\]—those opposed will answer no.” The
Chairman will then direct the clerk to call the roll. The negative being
put at the same time as the affirmative, it is too late, after the
question is put, to renew the debate. After the commencement of the roll
call, it is too late to ask to be excused from voting. The yeas and nays
cannot be ordered in committee of the whole \[§ 32\].

<span id="sec39"></span>39. Motions Requiring More than a Majority
Vote.\* \[Where no rule to the contrary is adopted, a majority vote of
the assembly, when a quorum \[§ 43\] is present, is sufficient for the
adoption of any motion, except for the suspension of a rule, which can
only be done by general consent, or unanimously. Congress requires a
two-thirds vote for only the motions to suspend and to amend the Rules,
to take up business out of its proper order, and to make a special order
\[see note to § 37\].\] The following motions shall require a two-thirds
vote for their adoption, as the right of discussion, and the right to
have the rules enforced, should not be abridged by a mere majority:

An Objection to the Consideration of a Question ………….. § 15.  
  To Take up a Question out of its proper order ……………. § 13.  
  To Suspend the Rules ………………………………….. § 18.  
  The Previous Question …………………………………. § 20.  
  To Close or Limit Debate ………………………………. § 37.  
  To Amend the Rules (requires previous notice also) ……….. § 43.  
  To Make a special order ……………………………….. § 13.
