### <span id="art07"></span>Art. VII. The Officers and the Minutes

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#art07"><strong>Art. VII.—Officers and the
Minutes</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec40">§ 40. Chairman or President</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec41">§ 41. Clerk, or Secretary, and the
Minutes</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec40"></span>40. Chairman\* \[In connection with this section
read § 44, and also § 40, 41.\] or President. The presiding officer,
when no special title has been assigned him, is ordinarily called the
Chairman (or in religious assemblies more usually the Moderator);
frequently the constitution of the assembly prescribes for him a title,
such as President.

His duties are generally as follows:

To open the session at the time at which the assembly is to meet, by
taking the chair and calling the members to order; to announce the
business before the assembly in the order in which it is to be acted
upon \[§ 44\]; to state and to put to vote \[§ 38\] all questions which
are regularly moved, or necessarily arise in the course of proceedings,
and to announce the result of the vote;

To restrain the members, when engaged in debate, within the rules of
order; to enforce on all occasions the observance of order and decorum
\[§ 36\] among the members, deciding all questions of order (subject to
an appeal to the assembly by any two members, § 14), and to inform the
assembly when necessary, or when referred to for the purpose, on a point
of order or practice;

To authenticate, by his signature, when necessary, all the acts, orders
and proceedings of the assembly, and in general to represent and stand
for the assembly, declaring its will, and in all things obeying its
commands.

The chairman shall rise\* \[It is not customary for the chairman to rise
while putting questions in very small bodies, such as committees, boards
of trustees, &c.\] to put a question to vote, but may state it sitting;
he shall also rise from his seat (without calling any one to the chair),
when speaking to a question of order, which he can do in preference to
other members. In referring to himself he should always use his official
title thus: “The Chair decides so and so,” not “I decide, &c.” When a
member has the floor, the chairman cannot interrupt him as long as he
does not transgress any of the rules of the assembly, excepting as
provided in [§ 2](/part_1_article_1.html#sec02).

He is entitled to vote when the vote is by ballot,\* \[But this right is
lost if he does not use it before the tellers have commenced to count
the ballots. The assembly can give leave to the chairman to vote under
such circumstances.\] and in all other cases where the vote would change
the result. Thus in a case where two-thirds vote is necessary, and his
vote thrown with the minority would prevent the adoption of the
question, he can cast his vote; so also he can vote with the minority
when it will produce a tie vote and thus cause the motion to fail.
Whenever a motion is made referring especially to the chairman, the
maker of the motion should put it to vote.

The chairman can, if it is necessary to vacate the chair, appoint a
chairman pro tem.,\*\* \[When there are Vice Presidents, then the first
one on the list that is present, is, by virtue of his office, chairman
during the absence of the President, and should always be called to the
chair when the President temporarily vacates it.\] but the first
adjournment puts an end to the appointment, which the assembly can
terminate before, if it pleases, by electing another chairman. But the
regular chairman, knowing that he will be absent from a future meeting,
cannot authorize another member to act in his place at such meeting; the
clerk \[§ 41\], or in his absence any member, should in such case call
the meeting to order, and a chairman pro tem. be elected, who would hold
office during that session \[§ 42\], without such office was terminated
by the entrance of the regular chairman.

The chairman sometimes calls a member to the chair, and himself takes
part in the debate. But this should rarely be done, and nothing can
justify it in a case where much feeling is shown, and there is a
liability to difficulty in preserving order. If the chairman has even
the appearance of being a partisan, he loses much of his ability to
control those who are on the opposite side of the question.\* \[The
unfortunate habit many chairmen have of constantly speaking upon
questions before the assembly, even interrupting the member who has the
floor, is unjustified by either the common parliamentary law, or the
practice of Congress. One who expects to take an active part in debate
should never accept the chair. “It is a general rule, in all
deliberative assemblies, that the presiding officer shall not
participate in the debate, or other proceedings, in any other capacity
than as such officer. He is only allowed, therefore, to state matters of
fact within his knowledge; to inform the assembly on points of order or
the course of proceeding, when called upon for that purpose, or when he
finds it necessary to do so; and on appeals from his decision on
questions of order, to address the assembly in debate.” \[Cushing’s
Manual, page 106.\] “Though the Speaker \[chairman\] may of right speak
to matters of order and be first heard, he is restrained from speaking
on any other subject except where the assembly have occasion for facts
within his knowledge; then he may, with their leave, state the matter of
fact.” \[Jefferson’s Manual, sec. xvii, and Barclay’s “Digest of the
Rules and Practice of the House of Representatives, U. S.,” page
195.\]\]

The chairman should not only be familiar with parliamentary usage, and
set the example of strict conformity to it, but he should be aman of
executive ability, capable of controlling men; and it should never be
forgotten, that, to control others, it is necessary to control one’s
self. An excited chairman can scarcely fail to cause trouble in a
meeting.

A chairman will often find himself perplexed with the difficulties
attending his position, and in such cases he will do well to heed the
advice of a distinguished writer on parliamentary law, and recollect
that—“The great purpose of all rules and forms, is to subserve the will
of the assembly, rather than to restrain it; to facilitate, and not to
obstruct, the expression of their deliberate sense.”

<span id="sec41"></span>41. Clerk or Secretary \[and the Minutes\]. The
recording officer is usually called the “Clerk” or “Secretary,”\* \[When
there are two secretaries, he is termed the “recording secretary,” and
the other one, the “corresponding secretary.” In many societies the
secretary, besides acting as recording officer, collects the dues of
members, and thus becomes to a certain extent a financial officer. In
most cases the treasurer acts as banker, only paying on the order of the
society, signed by the secretary alone, or by the president and
secretary. In such cases the secretary becomes in reality the financial
officer of the society, and should make reports to the society, of funds
received and from what sources, and of the funds expended and for what
purposes. See § 52 for his duties as financial officer.\] and the record
of proceedings the “Minutes.” His desk should be near that of the
chairman, and in the absence of the chairman, (if there is no vice
president present) when the hour for opening the session arrives, it is
his duty to call the meeting to order, and to preside until the election
of a chairman pro tem., which should be done immediately. He should keep
a record of the proceedings, commencing in a form similar to the
following :\*\* \[See Clerk and Minutes in Part II, § 51.\]

“At a regular quarterly meeting of \[state the name of the society\]
held on the 31st day of March, 1875, at \[state the place of meeting\],
the President in the chair, the minutes were read by the clerk and
approved.” If the regular clerk is absent, insert after the words “in
the chair,” the following: “The clerk being absent, Robert Smith was
appointed clerk pro tem. The minutes were then read and approved.” If
the minutes were not read, say “the reading of the minutes was dispensed
with.” The above form will show the essentials, which are as follows:
(a) The kind of meeting, “regular” \[or stated\] or “special,” or
“adjourned regular,” or “adjourned special;” (6) name of the assembly;
(c) date and place of meeting (excepting when the place is always the
same); (d) the fact of the presence of the regular chairman and clerk,
or in their absence the names of their substitutes; (e) whether the
minutes of the previous meeting were approved.

The minutes should be signed by the person who acted as clerk for that
meeting: in some societies the chairman must also sign them. When
published, they should be signed by both officers.

In keeping the minutes much depends upon the kind of meeting, and
whether the minutes are to be published. If they are to be published, it
is often of far more interest to know what was said by the leading
speakers, than to know what routine business was done, and what
resolutions adopted.

In such case the duties of the secretary are arduous, and he should have
at least one assistant. In ordinary society meetings and meetings of
Boards of Managers and Trustees, on the contrary, there is no object in
reporting the debates; the duty of the clerk, in such cases, is mainly
to record what is “done” by the assembly, not what is said by the
members. Without there is a rule to the contrary, he should enter every
Principal motion \[§ 6\] that is before the assembly, whether it is
adopted or rejected; and where there is a division \[see Voting, § 38\],
or where the vote is by ballot, he should enter the number of votes on
each side; and when the voting is by yeas and nays \[§ 38\], he should
enter a list of the names of those voting on each side. He should
endorse on the reports of committees, the date of their reception, and
what further action was taken upon them, and preserve them among the
records, for which he is responsible. He should in the minutes make a
brief summary of a report that has been agreed to, except where it
contains resolutions, in which case the resolutions will be entered in
full as adopted by the assembly, and not as if it was the report
accepted. The proceedings of the committee of the whole \[§ 32\], or
while acting informally \[§ 33\], should not be entered on the minutes.
Before an adjournment without day, it is customary to read over the
minutes for approval, if the next meeting of the board or society will
not occur for a long period. Where the regular meetings are not
separated by too great a time, the minutes are read at the next meeting.

The clerk should, previous to each meeting, for the use of the chairman,
make out an order of business \[§ 44\], showing in their exact order
what is necessarily to come before the assembly. He should also have at
each meeting a list of all standing committees, and such select
committees as are in existence at the time. When a committee is
appointed, he should hand the names of the committee and all papers
referred to it to the chairman, or some other of its members.
