### <span id="art04"></span>Art. IV. Committees and Informal Action

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art04"><strong>Art. IV.—Committees and Informal
Action</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec28">§ 28. Committees</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec29">§ 29. Form of their Reports</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec30">§ 30. Reception of their Reports</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec31">§ 31. Adoption of their Reports</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec32">§ 32. Committee of the Whole</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec33">§ 33. Informal consideration of a
question</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec28"></span>28. Committees. It is usual in deliberative
assemblies, to have all preliminary work in the preparation of matter
for their action, done by means of committees. These may be either
“standing committees” (which are appointed for the session \[§ 42\], or
for some definite time, as one year); or “select committees,” appointed
for a special purpose; or a “committee of the whole” \[§ 32\],
consisting of the entire assembly. \[For method of appointing committees
of the whole, see § 32; other committees, see commit, § 22.\] The first
person named on a committee is chairman, and should act as such, without
the committee should see fit to elect another chairman, which they are
competent to do. The clerk should furnish him, or some other member of
the committee, with notice of the appointment of the committee, giving
the names of the members, the matter referred to them, and such
instructions as the assembly have decided upon. The chairman shall call
the committee together, and if there is a quorum (a majority of the
committee, see § 43,) he should read or have read, the entire
resolutions referred to them; he should then read each paragraph, and
pause for amendments to be offered; when the amendments to that
paragraph are voted on he proceeds to the next, only taking votes on
amendments, as the committee cannot vote on the adoption of matter
referred to them by the assembly.

If the committee originate the resolutions, they vote, in the same way,
on amendments to each paragraph of the draft of the resolutions, (which
draft has been previously prepared by one of their members or a
sub-committee); they do not vote on the separate paragraphs, but having
completed the amendments, they vote on the adoption of the entire
report. When there is a preamble, it is considered last. If the report
originates with the committee, all amendments are to be incorporated in
the report; but, if the resolutions were referred, the committee cannot
alter the text, but must submit the original paper intact, with their
amendments (which may be in the form of a substitute, § 23) written on a
separate sheet.

A committee is a miniature assembly that must meet together in order to
transact business, and usually one of its members should be appointed
its clerk. Whatever is not agreed to by the majority of the members
present at a meeting (at which a quorum, consisting of a majority of the
members of the committee, shall be present) cannot form a part of its
report. The minority may be permitted to submit their views in writing
also, either together, or each member separately, but their reports can
only be acted upon, by voting to substitute one of them for the report
of the committee. The rules of the assembly, as far as possible, shall
apply in committee; but a reconsideration \[§ 27\] of a vote shall be
allowed, regardless of the time elapsed, only when every member who
voted with the majority is present when the reconsideration is moved.\*
\[Both the English common parliamentary law and the rules of Congress
prohibit the reconsideration of a vote by a committee; but the strict
enforcement of this rule in ordinary committees, would interfere with
rather than assist the transaction of business. The rule given above
seems more just, and more in accordance with the practice of ordinary
committees, who usually reconsider at pleasure. No improper advantage
can be taken of the privilege, as long as every member who voted with
the majority must be present when the reconsideration is moved.\] A
committee (except a committee of the whole, § 32\] may appoint a
sub-committee. When through with the business assigned them, a motion is
made for the committee to “rise” (which is equivalent to the motion to
adjourn), and that the chairman (or some member who is more familiar
with the subject) make its report to the assembly. The committee ceases
to exist as soon as the assembly receives the report [\[§ 30\]](/part_1_article_4.html#sec30).

The committee has no power to punish its members for disorderly conduct,
its resource being to report the facts to the assembly. No allusion can
be made in the assembly to what has occurred in committee, except it be
by a report of the committee, or by general consent. It is the duty of a
committee to meet on the call of any two its of members, if the chairman
be absent or decline to appoint such meeting. When a committee adjourns
without appointing a time for the next meeting, it is called together in
the same way as at its first meeting. When a committee adjourns to meet
at another time, it is not necessary (though usually advisable) that
absent members should be notified of the adjourned meeting.

<span id="sec29"></span>29. Forms of Reports of Committees. The form of
a report is usually similar to the following:

A standing committee reports thus: “The committee on \[insert name of
committee\] respectfully report,” \[or “beg leave to report,” or “beg
leave to submit the following report,”\] etc., letting the report
follow.

A select or special committee reports as follows: “The committee to
which was referred \[state the matter referred\] having considered the
same respectfully report,” etc. Or for “The committee” is sometimes
written “Your committee,” or “The undersigned, a committee.”

When a minority report is submitted, it should be in this form (the
majority reporting as above): “The undersigned, a minority of a
committee to which was referred,” etc. The majority report is the report
of the committee, and should never be made out as the report of the
majority.

All reports conclude with, “All of which is respectfully submitted.”
They are sometimes signed only by the chairman of the committee, but if
the matter is of much importance, it is better that the report be signed
by every member who concurs. The report is not usually dated, or
addressed, but can he headed, as for example, “Report of the Finance
Committee of the Y. P. A., on Renting a Hall.”

<span id="sec30"></span>30. Reception of Reports. When the report of a
committee is to be made, the chairman (or member appointed to make the
report) informs the assembly that the committee to whom was referred
such a subject or paper, has directed him to make a report thereon, or
report it with or without amendment, as the case may be; either he or
any other member may move that it be “received”\* \[A very common error
is, after a report has been read, to move that it be received; whereas,
the fact that it has been read, shows that it has been already received
by the assembly. Another mistake, less common, but dangerous, is to vote
that the report be accepted (which is equivalent to adopting it, see §
31), when the intention is only to have the report up for consideration
and afterwards move its adoption. Still a third error is to move that
“the report be adopted and the committee discharged,” when the committee
have reported in full and their report been received, so that the
committee has already ceased to exist. If the committee however have
made but a partial report, or report progress, then it is in order to
move that the committee be discharged from the further consideration of
the subject.\] now or at some other specified time.

Usually the formality of a vote on the reception of a report of a
committee is dispensed with, the time being settled by general consent.
Should any one object, a formal motion becomes necessary. When the time
arrives for the assembly to receive the report, the chairman of the
committee reads it in his place, and then delivers it to the clerk, when
it lies on the table till the assembly sees fit to consider it. If the
report consists of a paper with amendments, the chairman of the
committee reads the amendments with the coherence in the paper,
explaining the alterations and reasons of the committee for the
amendments, till he has gone through the whole. If the report is very
long, it is not usually read until the assembly is ready to consider it
\[see §§ 31 and 44\].

When the report has been received, whether it has been read or not, the
committee is thereby dissolved, and can act no more without it is
revived by a vote to recommit. If the report is recommitted, all the
parts of the report that have not been agreed to by the assembly, are
ignored by the committee as if the report had never been made.

<span id="sec31"></span>31. Adoption of Reports. When the assembly is to
consider a report, a motion should be made to “adopt,” “accept,” or
“agree to” the report, all of which, when carried, have the same effect,
namely, to make the doings of the committee become the acts of the
assembly, the same as if done by the assembly without the intervention
of a committee. If the report contains merely a statement of opinion or
facts, the motion should be to “accept” the report; if it also concludes
with resolutions or certain propositions, the motion should be to “agree
to” the resolutions, or to “adopt” the propositions. After the above
motion is made, the matter stands before the assembly exactly the same
as if there had been no committee, and the subject had been introduced
by the motion of the member who made the report. \[See § 34 for his
privileges in debate, and § 44 for the method of treating a report
containing several propositions, when being considered by the
assembly.\]

<span id="sec32"></span>32. Committee of the Whole. When an assembly has
to consider a subject which it does not wish to refer to a committee,
and yet where the subject matter is not well digested and put into
proper form for its definite action, or, when for any other reason, it
is desirable for the assembly to consider a subject with all the freedom
of an ordinary committee, it is the practice to refer the matter to the
“Committee of the Whole.”\* \[In large assemblies, such as the U. S.
House of Representatives, where a member can speak to any question but
once, the committee of the whole seems almost a necessity, as it allows
the freest discussion of a subject, while at any time it can rise and
thus bring into force the strict rules of the assembly.\]

If it is desired to consider the question at once, the motion is made,
“That the assembly do now resolve itself into a committee of the whole
to take under consideration,” etc., specifying the subject. This is
really a motion to “commit” \[see § 22 for its order of precedence,
etc.\] If adopted, the Chairman immediately calls another member to the
chair, and takes his place as a member of the committee. The committee
is under the rules of the assembly, excepting as stated hereafter in
this section.

The only motions in order are to amend and adopt, and that the committee
“rise and report,” as it cannot adjourn; nor can it order the “yeas and
nays” \[§ 38\]. The only way to close or limit debate in committee of
the whole, is for the assembly to vote that the debate in committee
shall cease at a certain time, or that after a certain time no debate
shall be allowed excepting on new amendments, and then only one speech
in favor of and one against it, of say, five minutes each; or in some
other way regulate the time for debate.\* \[In Congress no motion to
limit debate in committee of the whole is in order till after the
subject has been already considered in committee of the whole. As no
subject would probably be considered more than once in committee of the
whole, in an ordinary society, the enforcement of this rule would
practically prevent such a society from putting any limit to debate in
the committee. The rule as given above, allows the society, whenever
resolving itself into committee of the whole, to impose upon the debate
in the committee, such restrictions as are allowed in Congress after the
subject has already been considered in committee of the whole.\]

If no limit is prescribed, any member may speak as often as he can get
the floor, and as long each time as allowed in debate in the assembly,
provided no one wishes the floor who has not spoken on that particular
question. Debate having been closed at a particular time by order of the
assembly, it is not competent for the committee, even by unanimous
consent, to extend the time. The committee cannot refer the subject to
another committee. Like other committees \[§ 28\], it cannot alter the
text of any resolution referred to it; but if the resolution originated
in the committee, then all the amendments are incorporated in it.

When it is through with the consideration of the subject referred to it,
or if it wishes to adjourn, or to have the assembly limit debate, a
motion is made that “the committee rise and report,” etc., specifying
the result of its proceedings.

This motion “to rise” is equivalent to the motion to adjourn, in the
assembly, and is always in order (except when another member has the
floor), and is undebatable. As soon as this motion is adopted, the
presiding officer takes the chair, and the chairman of the committee,
having resumed his place in the assembly, arises and informs him, that
“the committee have gone through the business referred to them, and that
he is ready to make the report, when the assembly is ready to receive
it;” or he will make such other report as will suit the case.

The clerk does not record the proceedings of the committee on the
minutes, but should keep a memorandum of the proceedings for the use of
the committee. In large assemblies the clerk vacates his chair, which is
occupied by the chairman of the committee, and the assistant clerk acts
as clerk of the committee. Should the committee get disorderly, and the
chairman be unable to preserve order, the presiding officer can take the
chair, and declare the committee dissolved. The quorum of the committee
of the whole is the same as that of the assembly \[§ 43\]. If the
committee finds itself without a quorum, it can only rise and report the
fact to the assembly, which in such a case would have to adjourn.

<span id="sec33"></span>33. Informal Consideration of a Question (or
acting as if in committee of the whole). It has become customary in many
assemblies, instead of going into committee of the whole, to consider
the question “informally,” and afterwards to act “formally.” In a small
assembly there is no objection to this.\* \[In the U. S. Senate all
bills, joint resolutions and treaties, upon their second reading are
considered “as if the Senate were in committee of the whole,” which is
equivalent to considering them informally. \[U. S. Senate Rules 28 and
38.\] In large assemblies it is better to follow the practice of the
House of Representatives, and go into committee of the whole.\] While
acting informally upon any resolutions, the assembly can only amend and
adopt them, and without further motion the Chairman announces that “the
assembly acting informally \[or as in committee of the whole\] has had
such a subject under consideration, and has made certain amendments,
which he will report.” The subject comes before the assembly then as if
reported by a committee. While acting informally, the Chairman retains
his seat, as it is not necessary to move that the committee rise, but at
any time the adoption of such motions as to adjourn, the previous
question, to commit, or any motion except to amend or adopt, puts an end
to the informal consideration; as for example, the motion to commit is
equivalent to the following motions when in committee of the whole: (1)
That the committee rise; (2) that the committee of the whole be
discharged from the further consideration of the subject, and (3) that
it be referred to a committee.

While acting informally, every member can speak as many times as he
pleases, and as long each time as permitted in the assembly \[§ 34\],
and the informal action may be rejected or altered by the assembly.
While the clerk should keep a memorandum of the informal proceedings, it
should not be entered on the minutes, being only for temporary use. The
Chairman’s report to the assembly of the informal action, should be
entered on the minutes, as it belongs to the assembly’s proceedings.
