### <span id="art05"></span>Art. V. Debate and Decorum

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#art05"><strong>Art. V.—Debate and
Decorum</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec34">§ 34. Debate</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec35">§ 35. Undebatable questions and those opening the
main question to debate</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec36">§ 36. Decorum in debate</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec37">§ 37. Closing debate, methods of</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec34"></span>34. Debate.\* \[In connection with this section
read §§ 1-5.\] When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by
the Chairman before being debated \[see § 3\]. When any member is about
to speak in debate, he shall rise and respectfully address himself to
“Mr. Chairman.” \[“Mr. President” is used where that is the designated
title of the presiding officer; “Brother Moderator” is more common in
religious meetings.\] The Chairman shall then announce his name \[see §
2\]. By parliamentary courtesy, the member upon whose motion a subject
is brought before the assembly is first entitled to the floor, even
though another member has risen first and addressed the Chair; \[in case
of a report of a committee, it is the member who presents the report\] ;
and this member is also entitled to close the debate, but not until
every member choosing to speak, has spoken. This right to make the last
speech upon the question, is not taken away by the Previous Question \[§
20\] being ordered, or in any other way. With this exception, no member
shall speak more than twice to the same question (only once to a
question of order, § 14), nor longer than ten minutes at one time,
without leave of the assembly, and the question upon granting the leave
shall be decided by a majority vote without debate.\* \[The limit in
time should vary to suit circumstances, but the limit of two speeches of
ten minutes each will usually answer in ordinary assemblies, and it can
be increased, when desirable, by a majority vote as shown above, or
diminished as shown in § 37. In the U. S. House of Representatives no
member can speak more than once to the same question, nor longer than
one hour. The fourth rule of the Senate is as follows: “No Senator shall
speak more than twice in any one debate on the same day, without leave
of the Senate, which question shall be decided without debate.” If no
rule is adopted, each member can speak but once to the same question.\]

If greater freedom is desired, the proper course is to refer the subject
to the committee of the whole \[§ 32\], or to consider it informally \[§
33\]. \[For limiting or closing the debate, see § 37.\] No member can
speak the second time to a question, until every member choosing to
speak has spoken. But an amendment, or any other motion being offered,
makes the real question before the assembly a different one, and, in
regard to the right to debate, is treated as a new question. Merely
asking a question, or making a suggestion, is not considered as
speaking.

<span id="sec35"></span>35. Undebatable Questions. The following
questions shall be decided without debate, all others being debatable
\[see note at end of this section\]:

—To Fix the Time to which the Assembly shall Adjourn (when a privileged
question, § 10).  
—To Adjourn \[§ 11\], (or in committee, to rise, which is used instead
of to adjourn).  
—For the Orders of the Day \[§ 13\], and questions relating to the
priority of business.  
—An Appeal \[§ 14\] when made while the Previous Question is pending, or
when simply relating to indecorum or transgressions of the rules of
speaking, or to the priority of business.  
—Objection to the Consideration of a Question \[§ 15\].  
—Questions relating to Reading of Papers \[§ 16\], or Withdrawing a
Motion \[§ 17\], or Suspending the Rules \[§ 18\], or extending the
limits of debate \[§ 34\], or limiting or closing debate, or granting
leave to continue his speech to one who has been guilty of indecorum in
debate \[§ 36\].  
—To Lie on the Table or to Take from the Table \[§ 19\].  
—The Previous Question \[§ 20\].  
—To Reconsider \[§ 26\] a question which is itself undebatable.

The motion to Postpone to a certain time \[§ 21\] allows of but very
limited debate, which must be confined to the propriety of the
postponement; but to Reconsider a debatable question \[§ 26\], or to
Commit \[§ 22\], or Indefinitely Postpone \[§ 24\], opens the main
question \[§ 6\] to debate. To Amend \[§ 23\] opens the main question to
debate only so far as it is necessarily involved in the amendment.

The distinction between debate and making suggestions or asking a
question, should always be kept in view, and when the latter will assist
the assembly in determining the question, is allowed to a limited
extent, even though the question before the assembly is undebatable.

Note On Undebatable Questions.—The English common parliamentary law
makes all motions debatable, without there is a rule adopted limiting
debate \[Cushing’s Manual, § 330\]; but every assembly is obliged to
restrict debate upon certain motions. The restrictions to debate
prescribed in this section conform to the practice of Congress, where,
however, it is very common to allow of brief remarks upon the most
undebatable questions, sometimes five or six members speaking; this of
course is allowed only when no one objects.

By examining the above list, it will be found, that, while free debate
is allowed upon every principal question \[§ 6\], it is permitted or
prohibited upon other questions in accordance with the following
principles:

\(a\) Highly privileged questions, as a rule, should not be debated, as
in that case they could be used to prevent the assembly from coming to a
vote on the main question; (for instance, if the motion to adjourn were
debatable, it could be used \[see § 11\] in a way to greatly hinder
business). High privilege is, as a rule, incompatible with the right of
debate on the privileged question.

\(b\) A motion that has the effect to suppress a question before the
assembly, so that it cannot again be taken up that session \[§ 42\],
allows of free debate. And a subsidiary motion \[§ 7, except commit,
which see below,\] is debatable to just the extent that it interferes
with the right of the assembly to take up the original question at its
pleasure.

Illustrations: To “Indefinitely Postpone” \[§ 24\] a question, places it
out of the power of the assembly to again take it up during that
session, and consequently this motion allows of free debate, even
involving the whole merits of the original question.

To “Postpone to a certain time” prevents the assembly taking up the
question till the specified time, and therefore allows of limited debate
upon the propriety of the postponement.

To “Lie on the Table” leaves the question so that the assembly can at
any time consider it, and therefore should not be, and is not debatable.

To “Commit” would not be very debatable, according to this rule, but it
is an exception, because it is often important that the committee should
know the views of the assembly on the question, and it therefore is not
only debatable, but opens to debate the whole question which it is
proposed to refer to the committee.

<span id="sec36"></span>36. Decorum in Debate \[see § 2\]. In debate a
member must confine himself to the question before the assembly, and
avoid personalities. He cannot reflect upon any act of the assembly,
unless he intends to conclude his remarks with a motion to rescind such
action, or else while debating such motion. In referring to another
member, he should, as much as possible, avoid using his name, rather
referring to him as “the member who spoke last,” or in some other way
describing him. The officers of the assembly should always be referred
to by their official titles. It is not allowable to arraign the motives
of a member, but the nature or consequences of a measure may be
condemned in strong terms. It is not the man, but the measure, that is
the subject of debate. If at any time the Chairman rises to state a
point of order, or give information, or otherwise speak, within his
privilege \[see § 40\], the member speaking must take his seat till the
Chairman has been first heard. When called to order, the member must sit
down until the question of order is decided. If his remarks are decided
to be improper, he cannot proceed, if any one objects, without the leave
of the assembly expressed by a vote, upon which question there shall be
no debate.

Disorderly words should be taken down by the member who objects to them,
or by the clerk, and then read to the member; if he denies them, the
assembly shall decide by a vote whether they are his words or not. If a
member cannot justify the words he used, and will not suitably apologize
for using them, it is the duty of the assembly to act in the case,
requiring both members to withdraw\* \[If both are personally
interested. \[See page 161.\]\] till it has decided its course, it being
a general rule that no member should he present in the assembly when any
matter relating to himself is under debate. If any business has taken
place since the member spoke, it is too late to take notice of any
disorderly words he used.

<span id="sec37"></span>37. Closing Debate. Debate upon a question is
not closed by the Chairman rising to put the question, as, until both
the affirmative and negative are put, a member can claim the floor, and
re-open debate \[see § 38\]. Debate can be closed by the following
motions, which are undebatable \[§ 35\], and, except to Lie on the
Table, shall require a two-thirds\* \[In Congress, where each speaker
can occupy the floor one hour, any of these motions to cut off debate
can be adopted by a mere majority. In ordinary societies harmony is so
essential, that a two-thirds vote should be required to force the
assembly to a final vote without allowing free debate.\] vote for their
adoption \[§ 39\]:

\(a\) An objection to the consideration of a question \[only allowable
when the question is first introduced, § 15\], which, if sustained, not
only stops debate, but also throws the subject out of the assembly for
that session \[§ 42\]; which latter effect is the one for which it was
designed.

\(b\) To lie on the table \[§ 19\], which, if adopted, carries the
question to the table, from which it cannot be taken without a majority
favors such action.

\(c\) The previous question \[§ 20\], which has the effect of requiring
all the questions before the assembly \[excepting as limited in § 20\]
to be put to vote at once without further debate. It may be applied
merely to an amendment or to an amendment of an amendment.

\(d\) For the assembly to adopt an order (1) limiting debate upon a
special subject, either as to the number or length of the speeches; or
(2) closing debate upon the subject at a stated time, when all pending
questions shall be put to vote without further debate. Either of these
two measures may be applied only to a pending amendment, or an amendment
thereto, and when this is voted upon, the original question is still
open to debate and amendment.
