### <span id="art09"></span>Art. IX. Organization and Meetings

<table data-summary="" style="">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#art09"><strong>Art. IX.—Organization and
Meetings</strong></a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec46">§ 46. An Occasional or Mass Meeting</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec46a">(a) Organization</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec46b">(b) Adoption of resolutions</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec46c">(c) Committee on resolutions</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec46d">(d) Additional Officers</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec47">§ 47. A Convention or Assembly of
Delegates</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec48">§ 48. A Permanent Society</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec48a">(a) First meeting</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><a href="#sec48b">(b) Second meeting</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><a href="#sec49">§ 49. Constitutions, By-Laws, Rules of Order and
Standing Rules</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec46"></span><span id="sec46a"></span>46. An Occasional or
Mass Meeting. (a) Organization. When a meeting is held which is not one
of an organized society, shortly after the time appointed for the
meeting, some member of the assembly steps forward and says: “The
meeting will please come to order; I move that Mr. A. act as chairman of
this meeting.” Some one else says, “I second the motion.” The first
member then puts the question to vote, by saying, “It has been moved and
seconded that Mr. A. act as chairman of this meeting; those in favor of
the motion will say aye,” and when the affirmative vote is taken, he
says, “those opposed will say no.” If the majority vote in the
affirmative, he says, “The motion is carried; Mr. A. will take the
chair.” If the motion is lost, he announces that fact, and calls for the
nomination of some one else for chairman, and proceeds with the new
nomination as in the first case.\* \[Sometimes a member nominates a
chairman and no vote is taken, the assembly signifying their approval by
acclamation. The member who calls the meeting to order, instead of
making the motion himself, may act as temporary chairman, and say: “The
meeting will please come to order: will some one nominate a chairman?”
He puts the question to vote on the nomination as described above. In
large assemblies, the member who nominates, with one other member,
frequently conducts the presiding officer to the chair, and the chairman
makes a short speech, thanking the assembly for the honor conferred on
him.\]

When Mr. A. takes the chair, he says, “The first business in order is
the election of a secretary.” Some one then makes a motion as just
described, or he says “I nominate Mr. B,” when the chairman puts the
question as before. Sometimes several names are called out, and the
chairman, as he hears them, says, “Mr. B. is nominated; Mr. C. is
nominated,” etc; he then takes a vote on the first one he heard, putting
the question thus: “As many as are in favor of Mr. B. acting as
secretary of this meeting, will say aye;—those opposed will say no.” If
the motion is lost the question is put on Mr. C., and so on, till some
one is elected. In large meetings the secretary takes his seat near the
chairman: he should in all cases keep a record of the proceedings as
described in § 51.

<span id="sec46b"></span>(b) Adoption of Resolutions. These two officers
are all that are usually necessary for a meeting; so, when the secretary
is elected, the chairman asks, “What is the further pleasure of the
meeting?” If the meeting is merely a public assembly called together to
consider some special subject, it is customary at this stage of the
proceedings for some one to offer a series of resolutions previously
prepared, or else to move the appointment of a committee to prepare
resolutions upon the subject. In the first case he rises and says, “Mr.
Chairman;” the chairman responds, “Mr. C.” Mr. C., having thus obtained
the floor, then says, “I move the adoption of the following
resolutions,” which he then reads and hands to the chairman;\* \[The
practice in legislative bodies, is to send to the clerk’s desk all
resolutions, bills, etc., the title of the bill and the name of the
member introducing it, being endorsed on each. In such bodies, however,
there are several clerks and only one chairman. In many assemblies there
is but one clerk or secretary, and, as he has to keep the minutes, there
is no reason for his being constantly interrupted to read every
resolution offered. In such assemblies, without there is a rule or
established custom to the contrary, it is allowable, and frequently much
better, to hand all resolutions, reports, etc., directly to the
chairman. If they were read by the member introducing them, and no one
calls for another reading, the chairman can omit reading them when be
thinks they are fully understood. In reference to the manner of reading
and stating the question, when the resolution contains several
paragraphs, see Rules of Order, § 44.\] some one else says, “I second
the motion.” The chairman sometimes directs the secretary to read the
resolutions again, after which he says, “The question is on the adoption
of the resolutions just read,” and if no one rises immediately, he adds,
“Are you ready for the question?” If no one then rises, he says, “As
many as are in favor of the adoption of the resolutions just read, will
say aye;” after the ayes have voted, he says, “As many as are of a
contrary opinion will say no;” he then announces the result of the vote
as follows: “The motion is carried—the resolutions are adopted,” or,
“The ayes have it—the resolutions are adopted.”

<span id="sec46c"></span>(c) Committee to draft Resolutions. If it is
preferred to appoint a committee to draft resolutions, a member, after
he has addressed the Chair and been recognized, says, “I move that a
committee be appointed to draft resolutions expressive of the sense of
this meeting on,” etc., adding the subject for which the meeting was
called. This motion being seconded, the Chairman states the question \[§
67\] and asks, “Are you ready for the question?” If no one rises, he
puts the question, announces the result, and, if it is carried, he asks,
“Of how many shall the committee consist?” If only one number is
suggested, he announces that the committee will consist of that number;
if several numbers are suggested, he states the different ones and then
takes a vote on each, beginning with the largest, until one number is
selected.

He then inquires, “How shall the committee be appointed?” This is
usually decided without the formality of a vote. The committee may be
“appointed” by the Chair—in which case the chairman names the committee
and no vote is taken; or the committee may be “nominated” by the Chair,
or the members of the assembly (no member naming more than one, except
by unanimous consent), and then the assembly vote on their appointment.
When the chairman nominates, after stating the names he puts one
question on the entire committee, thus: “As many as are in favor of
these gentlemen constituting the committee, will say aye.” If
nominations are made by members of the assembly, and more names
mentioned than the number of the committee, a separate vote should be
taken on each name. (In a mass meeting it is safer to have all
committees appointed by the chairman.)

When the committee are appointed they should at once retire and agree
upon a report, which should be written out as described in § 53. During
their absence other business may be attended to, or the time may be
occupied with hearing addresses. Upon their return the chairman of the
committee (who is the one first named on the committee, and who quite
commonly, though not necessarily, is the one who made the motion to
appoint the committee), avails himself of the first opportunity to
obtain the floor,\* \[See Rules of Order, § 2.\] when he says, “The
committee appointed to draft resolutions, are prepared to report.” The
chairman tells him that the assembly will now hear the report, which is
then read by the chairman of the committee, and handed to the presiding
officer, upon which the committee is dissolved without any action of the
assembly.

A member then moves the “adoption” or “acceptance” of the report, or
that “the resolutions be agreed to,” which motions have the same effect
if carried, namely, to make the resolutions the resolutions of the
assembly just as if the committee had had nothing to do with them.\* \[A
very common error is, after a report has been read, to move that it be
received; whereas, the fact that it has been read, shows that it has
been already received by the assembly. Another mistake, less common but
dangerous, is to vote that the report be accepted which is equivalent to
adopting it), when the intention is only to have the report up for
consideration and afterwards move its adoption.\]

When one of these motions is made, the chairman acts as stated above
when the resolutions were offered by a member. If it is not desired to
immediately adopt the resolutions, they can be debated, modified, their
consideration postponed, etc., as explained in §§ 55-63.

When through with the business for which the assembly were convened, or
when from any other cause it is desirable to close the meeting, some one
moves “to adjourn;” if the motion is carried and no other time for
meeting has been appointed, the chairman says, “The motion is carried;
—this assembly stands adjourned without day.” \[Another method by which
the meeting may be conducted is shown in § 48.\]

<span id="sec46d"></span>(d) Additional Officers. If more officers are
required than a chairman and secretary, they can be appointed before
introducing the resolutions, in the manner described for those officers;
or the assembly can first form a temporary organization in the manner
already described, only adding “pro tem.” to the title of the officers,
thus: “chairman pro tem.” In this latter case, as soon as the secretary
pro tem. is elected, a committee is appointed to nominate the permanent
officers, as in the case of a convention \[§ 47\]. Frequently the
presiding officer is called the President, and sometimes there is a
large number of Vice Presidents appointed for mere complimentary
purposes. The Vice Presidents in large formal meetings, sit on the
platform beside the President, and in his absence, or when he vacates
the chair, the first on the list that is present should take the chair.

<span id="sec47"></span>47. Meeting of a Convention or Assembly of
Delegates. If the members of the assembly have been elected or appointed
as members, it becomes necessary to know who are properly members of the
assembly and entitled to vote, before the permanent organization is
effected. In this case a temporary organization is made, as already
described, by the election of a chairman and secretary “pro tem.,” when
the chairman announces, “The next business in order is the appointment
of a committee on credentials.” A motion may then be made covering the
entire case, thus: “I move that a committee of three on the credentials
of members be appointed by the Chair, and that the committee report as
soon as practicable;” or they may include only one of these details,
thus: “I move that a committee be appointed on the credentials of
members.” In either case the Chair proceeds as already described in the
cases of committees on resolutions \[§ 46, (c)\].

On the motion to accept the report of the committee, none can vote
except those reported by the committee as having proper credentials. The
committee, beside reporting a list of members with proper credentials,
may report doubtful or contested cases, with recommendations, which the
assembly may adopt, or reject, or postpone, etc. Only members whose
right to their seats is undisputed, can vote.

The chairman, after the question of credentials is disposed of, at least
for the time, announces that “The next business in order is the election
of permanent officers of the assembly.” Some one then moves the
appointment of a committee to nominate the officers, in a form similar
to this: “I move that a committee of three be appointed by the Chair to
nominate the permanent officers of this convention.” This motion is
treated as already explained. When the committee make their report, some
one moves “That the report of the committee be accepted and that the
officers nominated be declared the officers of this convention.”\*
\[Where there is any competition for the offices, it is better that they
be elected by ballot. In this case, when the nominating committee
report, a motion can be made as follows: “I move that the convention now
proceed to ballot for its permanent officers;” or “I move that we now
proceed to the election, by ballot, of the permanent officers of this
convention.” \[See Rules of Order, § 38, for balloting, and other
methods of voting.\] The constitutions of permanent societies usually
provide that the officers shall be elected by ballot.\] This motion
being carried, the chairman declares the officers elected, and instantly
calls the new presiding officer to the chair, and the temporary
secretary is at the same time replaced. The convention is now organized
for work.

<span id="sec48"></span><span id="sec48a"></span>48. A Permanent
Society. (a) First Meeting. When it is desired to form a permanent
society, those interested in it should see that only the proper persons
are invited to be present, at a certain time and place. It is not usual
in mass meetings, or meetings called to organize a society, to commence
until fifteen or thirty minutes after the appointed time, when some one
steps forward and says, “The meeting will please come to order; I move
that Mr. A. act as chairman of this meeting;” some one “seconds the
motion,” when the one who made the motion puts it to vote (or, as it is
called, “puts the question”), as already described, under an “occasional
meeting” \[§ 46, (a)\]; and, as in that case, when the chairman is
elected, he announces as the first business in order the election of a
secretary.

After the secretary is elected, the chairman calls on some member who is
most interested in getting up the society, to state the object of the
meeting. When this member rises he says, “Mr. Chairman;” the chairman
then announces his name, when the member proceeds to state the object of
the meeting. Having finished his remarks, the chairman may call on other
members to give their opinions upon the subject, and sometimes a
particular speaker is called out by members who wish to hear him. The
chairman should observe the wishes of the assembly, and while being
careful not to be too strict, he must not permit any one to occupy too
much time and weary the meeting.

When a sufficient time has been spent in this informal way, some one
should offer a resolution, so that definite action can be taken. Those
interested in getting up the meeting, if it is to be a large one, should
have previously agreed upon what is to be done, and be prepared at the
proper time to offer a suitable resolution, which may be in a form
similar to this: “Resolved, That it is the sense of this meeting that a
society for \[state the object of the society\] should now be formed in
this city.” This resolution, when seconded, and stated by the chairman,
would be open to debate and be treated as already described \[§ 46,
(b)\]. This preliminary motion could have been offered at the
commencement of the meeting, and if the meeting is a very large one,
this would probably be better than to have the informal discussion.

After this preliminary motion has been voted on, or even without waiting
for such motion, one like this can be offered: “I move that a committee
of five be appointed by the Chair, to draft a Constitution and By-Laws
for a society for \[here state the object\], and that they report at an
adjourned meeting of this assembly.” This motion can be amended \[§ 56\]
by striking out and adding words, etc., and it is debatable.

When this committee is appointed, the chairman may inquire, “Is there
any other business to be attended to?” or, “What is the further pleasure
of the meeting?” When all business is finished, a motion can be made to
adjourn to meet at a certain place and time, which, when seconded, and
stated by the Chair, is open to debate and amendment. It is usually
better to fix the time of the next meeting \[see § 63\] at an earlier
stage of the meeting, and then, when it is desired to close the meeting,
move simply “to adjourn,” which cannot be amended or debated. When this
motion is carried, the chairman says, “This meeting stands adjourned to
meet at,” etc., specifying the time and place of the next meeting.

<span id="sec48b"></span>(b) Second Meeting.\* \[Ordinary meetings of a
society are conducted like this second meeting, the chairman, however,
announcing the business in the order prescribed by the rules of the
society \[§ 72\]. For example, after the minutes are read and approved,
he would say, “The next business in order is hearing reports from the
standing committees.” He may then call upon each committee in their
order, for a report, thus: “Has the committee on applications for
membership any report to make?” In which case the committee may report,
as shown above, or some member of it reply that they have no report to
make. Or, when the chairman knows that there are but few if any reports
to make, it is better, after making the announcement of the business,
for him to ask, “Have these committees any reports to make?” After a
short pause, if no one rises to report, he states, “There being no
reports from the standing committees, the next business in order is
hearing the reports of select committees,” when he will act the same as
in the case of the standing committees. The chairman should always have
a list of the committees, to enable him to call upon them, as well as to
guide him in the appointment of new committees.\] At the next meeting
the officers of the previous meeting, if present, serve until the
permanent officers are elected. When the hour arrives for the meeting,
the chairman standing, says, “The meeting will please come to order:” as
soon as the assembly is seated, he adds, “The secretary will read the
minutes of the last meeting.” If any one notices an error in the
minutes, he can state the fact as soon as the secretary finishes reading
them; if there is no objection, without waiting for a motion, the
chairman directs the secretary to make the correction. The chairman then
says, “If there is no objection the minutes will stand approved as read”
\[or “corrected,” if any corrections have been made\].

He announces as the next business in order, “the hearing of the report
of the committee on the Constitution and By-Laws.” The chairman of the
committee, after addressing “Mr. Chairman” and being recognized, reads
the committee’s report and then hands it to the chairman.\* \[In large
and formal bodies the chairman, before inquiring what is to be done with
the report, usually directs the secretary to read it again. See note to
§ 46 (c), for a few common errors in acting upon reports of committees.
\[See also note to § 46 (b).\]\] If no motion is made, the chairman
says, “You have heard the report read—what order shall be taken upon
it?” Or simply inquires, “What shall be done with the report?” Some one
moves its adoption, or still better, moves “the adoption of the
Constitution reported by the committee,” and when seconded, the chairman
says, “The question is on the adoption of the Constitution reported by
the committee.” He then reads the first article of the Constitution, and
asks, “Are there any amendments proposed to this article?” If none are
offered, after a pause, he reads the next article and asks the same
question, and proceeds thus until he reads the last article, when he
says, “The whole Constitution having been read, it is open to
amendment.” Now any one can move amendments to any part of the
Constitution.

When the chairman thinks it has been modified to suit the wishes of the
assembly, he inquires, “Are you ready for the question?” If no one
wishes to speak, he puts the question, “As many as are in favor of
adopting the Constitution as amended, will say aye;” and then, “As many
as are opposed, will say no.” He distinctly announces the result of the
vote, which should always be done. If the articles of the Constitution
are subdivided into sections or paragraphs, then the amendments should
be made by sections or paragraphs, instead of by articles.

The chairman now states that the Constitution having been adopted, it
will be necessary for those wishing to become members to sign it (and
pay the initiation fee, if required by the Constitution), and suggests,
if the assembly is a large one, that a recess be taken for the purpose.
A motion is then made to take a recess for say ten minutes, or until the
Constitution is signed. The constitution being signed, no one is
permitted to vote excepting those who have signed it.

The recess having expired, the chairman calls the meeting to order and
says, “The next business in order is the adoption of By-Laws.” Some one
moves the adoption of the By-Laws reported by the committee, and they
are treated just like the Constitution. The chairman then asks, “What is
the further pleasure of the meeting?” or states that the next business
in order is the election of the permanent officers of the society. In
either case some one moves the appointment of a committee to nominate
the permanent officers of the society, which motion is treated as
already described in § 47. As each officer is elected he replaces the
temporary one, and when they are all elected the organization is
completed.

If the society is one that expects to own real estate, it should be
incorporated according to the laws of the state in which it is situated,
and for this purpose, some one on the committee on the Constitution
should consult a lawyer before this second meeting, so that the laws may
be conformed to. In this case the trustees are usually instructed to
take the proper measures to have the society incorporated.

<span id="sec49"></span>49. Constitutions, By-Laws, Rules of Order and
Standing Rules. In forming a Constitution and By-Laws, it is always best
to procure copies of those adopted by several similar societies, and for
the committee, after comparing them, to select one as the basis of their
own, amending each article just as their own report is amended by the
Society. When they have completed amending the Constitution, it is
adopted by the committee. The By-Laws are treated in the same way, and
then, having finished the work assigned them, some one moves, “That the
committee rise, and that the chairman (or some other member) report the
Constitution and By-Laws to the assembly.” If this is adopted, the
Constitution and By-Laws are written out, and a brief report made of
this form: “Your committee, appointed to draft a Constitution and
By-Laws, would respectfully submit the following, with the
recommendation that they be adopted as the Constitution and By-Laws of
this society;” which is signed by all the members of the committee that
concur in it. Sometimes the report is only signed by the chairman of the
committee.

In the organization just given, it is assumed that both a Constitution
and By-Laws are adopted. This is not always done; some societies adopt
only a Constitution, and others only By-Laws. Where both are adopted,
the constitution usually contains only the following:

\(1\) Name and object of the society. (2) Qualification of members. (3)
Officers, their election and duties. (4) Meetings of the society (only
including what is essential, leaving details to the By-Laws). (5) How to
amend the Constitution.

These can be arranged in five articles, each article being subdivided
into sections. The Constitution containing nothing but what is
fundamental, it should be made very difficult to amend; usually previous
notice of the amendment is required, and also a two-thirds or
three-fourths vote for its adoption \[§ 73\]. It is better not to
require a larger vote than two-thirds, and, where the meetings are
frequent, an amendment should not be allowed to be made except at a
quarterly or annual meeting, after having been proposed at the previous
quarterly meeting.

The By-Laws contain all the other standing rules of the society, of such
importance that they should be placed out of the power of any one
meeting to modify; or they may omit the rules relating to the conduct of
business in the meetings, which would then constitute the Rules of Order
of the society. Every society, in its By-Laws or Rules of Order, should
adopt a rule like this: “The rules contained in—(specifying the work on
parliamentary practice) shall govern the society in all cases to which
they are applicable, and in which they are not inconsistent with the
Rules of Order (or By-Laws) adopted by the society.” Without such a
rule, any one so disposed, could cause great trouble in a meeting.

In addition to the Constitution, By-Laws and Rules of Order, in nearly
every society resolutions of a permanent nature are occasionally
adopted, which are binding on the society until they are rescinded or
modified. These are called Standing Rules, and can be adopted by a
majority vote at any meeting. After they have been adopted, they cannot
be modified at the same session except by a reconsideration \[§ 60\]. At
any future session they can be suspended, modified or rescinded by a
majority vote. The Standing Rules, then, comprise those rules of a
society which have been adopted like ordinary resolutions, without the
previous notice, etc., required for By-Laws, and consequently, future
sessions of the society are at liberty to terminate them whenever they
please. No Standing Rule (or other resolution) can be adopted which
conflicts with the Constitution, By-Laws or Rules of Order.\* \[In
practice these various classes of rules are frequently very much mixed.
The Standing Rules of some societies are really By-Laws, as the society
cannot suspend them, nor can they be amended until previous notice is
given. This produces confusion without any corresponding benefit.
Standing Rules should contain only such rules as are subject to the will
of the majority of any meeting, and which it may be expedient to change
at any time, without the delay incident to giving previous notice. Rules
of Order should contain only the rules relating to the orderly
transaction of the business in the meetings of the society. The By-Laws
should contain all the other rules of the society which are of too great
importance to be changed without giving notice to the society of such
change; provided that the most important of these can be placed in a
Constitution instead of in the By-Laws. These latter three should
provide for their amendment. The Rules of Order should provide for their
suspension. The By-Laws sometimes provide for the suspension of certain
articles. None of these three can be suspended without it is expressly
provided for.
