## <span id="pref01"></span>PREFACE

There appears to be much needed a work on parliamentary law, based, in
its general principles, upon the rules and practice of Congress, and
adapted, in its details, to the use of ordinary societies. Such a work
should give, not only the methods of organizing and conducting the
meetings, the duties of the officers and the names of the ordinary
motions, but in addition, should state in a systematic manner, in
reference to each motion, its object and effect; whether it can be
amended or debated; if debatable, the extent to which it opens the main
question to debate; the circumstances under which it can be made, and
what other motions can be made while it is pending. This Manual has been
prepared with a view to supplying the above information in a condensed
and systematic manner, each rule being either complete in itself, or
giving references to every section that in any way qualifies it, so that
a stranger to the work can refer to any special subject with safety.

To aid in quickly referring to as many as possible of the rules relating
to each motion, there is placed immediately before the Index, a Table of
Rules, which enables one, without turning a page, to find the answers to
some two hundred questions. The Table of Rules is so arranged as to
greatly assist the reader in systematizing his knowledge of
parliamentary law.

The second part is a simple explanation of the common methods of
conducting business in ordinary meetings, in which the motions are
classified according to their uses, and those used for a similar purpose
compared together. This part is expressly intended for that large class
of the community, who are unfamiliar with parliamentary usages and are
unwilling to devote much study to the subject, but would be glad with
little labor to learn enough to enable them to take part in meetings of
deliberative assemblies without fear of being out of order. The object
of Rules of Order in deliberative assemblies, is to assist an assembly
to accomplish the work for which it was designed, in the best possible
manner. To do this, it is necessary to somewhat restrain the individual,
as the right of an individual in any community to do what he pleases, is
incompatible with the best interests of the whole. Where there is no
law, but every man does what is right in his own eyes, there is the
least of real liberty. Experience has shown the importance of
definiteness in the law; and in this country, where customs are so
slightly established and the published manuals of parliamentary practice
so conflicting, no society should attempt to conduct business without
having adopted some work upon the subject, as the authority in all cases
not covered by their own rules.

It has been well said by one of the greatest of English writers on
parliamentary law: “Whether these forms be in all cases the most
rational or not is really not of so great importance. It is much more
material that there should be a rule to go by, than what that rule is,
that there may be a uniformity of proceeding in business, not subject to
the caprice of the chairman, or captiousness of the members. It is very
material that order, decency and regularity be preserved in a dignified
public body.”

H. M. R.

_December_, 1875.
